

Dedication
“Those who flow as life flows know they need no other force.”
LAO TZU
This book is dedicated to my daughter, Ariana.
May you always know the gifts of nature that you contain
and the force of nature that you are.
Contents
Cover
Title Page
Dedication
Introduction
Part 1. Our Bodies, Our Time
1. Ending Your Mys-education
2. Break Free from the 24-Hour Clock
3. Beyond Your Period—Understanding Your Hormonal
Advantages
Part 2. Getting Your Body in the FLO
4. Never Diet Again
5. Work Out Less, Get More Fit
6. Your Blueprint to Do More with Less Stress
Biohacking Tool Kit
Part 1: How to Get in the FLO When Your Hormones Are
Out of Balance
Part 2: What to Know If You’re on Hormonal Birth
Control
Part 3. Getting Your Life in the FLO
7. Sustainable Success at Work
8. Get More of What You Want in Sex and Relationships
9. Making Motherhood Easier
10. Dynamic, Wise, and Free
Meal Plans
Recipes
Follicular Phase
Overnight Oats with Cashews, Goji Berries, and Cinnamon
Lentil Tomato Quinoa Pilaf
Chicken Veggie Buddha Bowl
Ovulatory Phase
Sweet Green Protein Smoothie
Hearty Greens Salad with Salmon Toasts
Zoodles with Pumpkin Seed Pesto
Luteal Phase
Avocado Tater-Toast
Turkey Tacos (With Vegetarian Option)
Chickpea Pasta with Garlic Kale
Menstrual Phase
PBJ Bowl
Bento Salmon Soba Miso Lunch
Bunless Bison Burgers with the Works
Guides and Resources
Acknowledgments
References
Index
About the Author
Praise
Also by Alisa Vitti
Copyright
About the Publisher
FEEL BETTER AND LIVE SMARTER WITH IN
THE FLO
I’ve created a special bundle of resources to help you put into
action what you learn in this book, including a quick-start
program to help you get started, a bonus self-care guide, a
community where you can connect with other readers, special
downloads, and more! You can access everything for free at
www.IntheFLObook.com/bonus.
Introduction
What’s the greatest lesson a woman should learn?
That since day one, she’s already had everything
she needs within herself. It’s the world that
convinced her she did not.
—RUPI KAUR
I
remember from a young age hearing from multiple sources
that to succeed as a woman you have to work hard—twice as
hard as a man, in fact. Early on, I felt a drive to do as much as
I could and to push myself. In school, I took all of the hardest
classes, worked for top grades, and was involved in activities
to develop my creative talents and practice leading teams.
These are all admirable pursuits—but I noticed that my drive
came with a cost. In high school I was regularly up past
midnight trying to complete homework. I was spread as thin as
I could be, and now, looking back, I can see the toll it was
taking on my body. The pressure I felt to perform, create,
achieve, and work only grew, however, as I continued on
through college and into my career. All the while, my health
issues became more problematic. My anxiety went from
occasional to constant, my insomnia became a nightly
problem, I was gaining weight despite being active daily, my
skin was breaking out, my periods were missing, and I felt
more and more overwhelmed by all that I had to do. Instead of
being invigorated by the things I wanted to do, I felt unable to
tackle them and drained. I criticized myself for
procrastination, for inefficient time management, and for not
having my body and my life perfectly together. I tried diets,
workouts, and planners, and I bought every inspirational book
I thought might help me figure out how to do it all. I see my
struggles reflected all the time in the lives of other women—
and the fact is we’re working long hours but struggling to get
everything done, care-taking children and friends with little
time left over to rest, exercising constantly but not seeing
results, trying to eat well but still feeling blah—and we find
we have less and less energy left to create our best work,
nurture our relationships, and access our joy for life in general.
We’re all looking for a way to make everything more doable,
but doing everything still leaves us feeling like somehow
we’ve failed.
Our culture forces us to keep pushing, pushing, pushing.
We overstretch ourselves, our expectations, our bodies, and
our time. We race breathlessly to keep up with never-ending
to-do lists, put everybody else’s needs first, and juggle career
and family. We look outside ourselves—relying on magazine
articles or male-centered health research—for healthy living
strategies rather than listening to the inner wisdom of our
biochemistry.
As a result, our physical health is deteriorating. Fibroids,
endometriosis, polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS), infertility,
low sex drive, premature ovarian failure (POF), and
challenging perimenopause are all on the rise. Chronic stress
takes a toll on our bodies, our abilities to pursue our dreams,
and our bonds with the people we love. At our deepest levels,
we feel we’re not good enough, not smart enough, not
organized enough to achieve what we desire in our lives.
What if I told you that there was a secret blueprint you’ve
had available to you for years—a simple way to be more
powerful and more effective in all areas of your life? Not only
have you been ignoring it, you’ve viewed it as a liability.
You’ve even tried to override this powerful tool,
unintentionally dampening its force and causing it to work
against you. As a result, it’s sapping your energy, making you
sick, and holding you back from getting everything you want
—and deserve—in life.
The secret isn’t really a secret—it’s been within you all
along. I’ll cut right to the chase: your female biochemistry, and
more specifically, your hormonal cycle—the one you probably
lament on a monthly basis—is an incredible asset. Think of it
as our unique and miraculous female advantage. It’s a game-
changing tool we can use to empower every aspect of our lives
—if we will only leverage it.
The problem is, we’ve been taught the opposite about our
hormonal cycle. From the moment women get our first
periods, we’re told about the cramps, the premenstrual
syndrome (PMS), the burden our bodies must now take on.
From a young age, we’re taught to feel ashamed rather than
empowered by our bodies. Something that is so fundamental
to us—our biochemistry, our reproductive system, our
menstrual cycle—is twisted into “the curse” that we must hide
or “deal with” rather than celebrate and use. We’ve been
conditioned to ignore our hormonal cycle until something goes
wrong with it. Then we treat it like an adversary that needs to
be tamed with medication or other interventions so we can go
back to ignoring it. This treatment has created a dysfunctional
relationship with our hormones, our bodies, and ourselves—
obliterating the power of our hormones and rendering them
ineffective at best and a stumbling block at worst.
The good news is, with some simple lifestyle tweaks you
can tap into this natural power source to biohack your way to
better health and fitness, enhance your productivity, master
time management, and enjoy greater success in every area of
your life. Best of all, it’s really easy (compared with
exhausting yourself trying to cram as much as possible into
your day, striving to accomplish impossible to-do lists, and
ignoring your most basic physical needs). By living, eating,
and working in synchrony with your cyclical nature rather than
fighting against it, you can unleash your creativity, fire up
your energy, strengthen your relationships, and even be a
better mom (if you’re a mom). You’ll use time strategically
instead of being a slave to your calendar, increasing your
energy and ultimately getting more done with fewer struggles.
You’ll tap into that elusive sensation of “flow”—that
incredible feeling you have when everything just clicks. You’ll
be able to reframe your concept of success to feel great about
yourself rather than tear yourself down. You’ll intuitively
understand how to manage stress, increase self-satisfaction,
quiet your inner critical voice, improve your health, and
empower yourself to become productive and efficient in ways
that are sustainable for you.
All this is achievable, but we can’t access our full potential
when we’re living by someone else’s rules and not listening to
the wisdom within. Simply put, we are round pegs trying to fit
ourselves into square holes—no wonder we’re exhausted. We
live out of sync with our unique female brain and body
chemistry; we don’t eat in a pro-hormonal way that gives our
endocrine system the building blocks it needs to keep our
hormones balanced, and too often we’re prescribed
medications like synthetic hormones that further prevent us
from accessing the inherent gifts inside our bodies that could
help us live our best lives. Our non-female-centric diet and
lifestyle put a strain on a system that is perfectly equipped by
nature to keep our hormones balanced and health optimized.
Being out of sync with our female chemistry weakens our
thyroid, our ovaries, our livers, our adrenals, our immunity,
and our digestion. In fact, being out of sync weakens
everything about our physical health, makes our thinking
foggy, and takes us out of our creative zone.
The truth is, all the cultural myths about women’s bodies
—that we are inherently weaker, more vulnerable to aging,
less worthy of study—are BS. We’ve been sold a lie—harmful
propaganda that says our body and biochemistry are a
disadvantage. It’s time to flip the script. I’ve pioneered the
groundbreaking Cycle Syncing Method™ to empower women,
finally, to use their hormones in ways that are nothing short of
revolutionary.
Syncing with your cycle is all about knowing where you
are in your menstrual cycle and using that knowledge to
understand yourself better and support yourself as hormone
levels change. In my first best-selling book, WomanCode, I
shared the eye-opening message that you could put your
hormonal problems—think PMS, PCOS, fibroids, and
endometriosis—into remission naturally with food and diet
changes. I knew this message would create an “aha moment”
for many women, but I was absolutely blown away by the
response. What I learned from the hundreds of thousands of
women who have reached out to me since then—at our center,
at wellness conferences where I speak, via social media, and
through the MyFLO app—was even more important. Listening
to their stories, I realized there was a much bigger message to
share—that the false notions about our female biochemistry
have robbed us of far more than just our hormonal health.
They’ve stolen our confidence, our vitality, and the very
opportunity to live our best lives.
Enough!
The time to reclaim your female biochemistry is now. You
just need to learn how to start tapping into its power. This
book will help you do it. Drawing on leading-edge research in
the fields of neuroendocrinology, functional medicine,
nutritional genomics, chronobiology, integrative nutrition, and
behavioral psychology, this book will explore the intersection
of hormones, neurochemistry, and productivity—all in an
effort to allow you to reconnect with the feminine advantage
that resides within you. The book will also give you a new
female-centered paradigm to manage your time and
productivity more effortlessly, in ways specifically tailored to
your female needs.
Once you have the foundational, perspective-shifting
knowledge needed to reverse the cultural conditioning that’s
been holding us back, I’ll break down the four phases of your
hormonal cycle and how they affect your brain, moods,
energy, and behaviors. You’ll learn how to care for yourself in
each unique phase and harness strengths around your
creativity, energy, emotions, and sexuality. I’ll also introduce
you to a female-centered form of time management that works
with your hormonal phases to help you get more done with
less stress and get more enjoyment out of everything you do.
In other words, we’ll throw out living exclusively by the
standard 24-hour clock (which—no surprise—happens to be in
alignment with the male hormonal cycle) and shift to a more
sustainable 28-day approach. This book provides a clear plan
to biohack your health and fitness in ways that are specifically
tailored to your unique biochemistry, and offers tips to help
you bring these insights beyond self-care and personal time
management, into your interactions with the larger world
around you. Believe me, we get into the nitty-gritty. You’ll
know on what day to ask for that promotion, the best time to
do yoga or cardio, when to double up on leafy greens, the best
week to spend time being introspective and gentle with
yourself, and when to unleash your social butterfly.
The book also provides a planner and evaluation tool to
help you engage this superpower, and teaches you how to heal
the root causes of your hormone imbalances to create a
lifestyle that keeps you from being vulnerable to new
imbalances, and lets you harness your body’s innate patterns
as a tool for peak productivity, flow, and happiness. Even if
you aren’t suffering from hormonal imbalance, you can benefit
from tuning in to your female biochemistry to help you
achieve more with less stress.
I teach women of all ages all across the world how to use
the Cycle Syncing Method™ every day—and their hormonal
health and lives are transforming in ways they never dreamed
possible. (Take note: you can engage this cycle even if you’re
postmenopausal or are no longer bleeding.) Whether you’re
coming to this book to relieve health issues, decrease stress, or
just to figure out how to live your best life, there’s something
here for you.
This is the right book for you if any of these statements
rings true:
You feel like you are always trying to do it all, but there’s
never enough time.
You strive to give 100 percent in every area of your life,
but it’s hard to keep up with your own expectations.
You want to be more creative, more enterprising, more
consistent, but you feel like you start and then don’t
follow through.
You have tried every kind of planner to be more
organized.
You’ve tried every diet and fitness program and don’t get
the results you want.
You’re interested in biohacking, but not sure where to
start.
You feel continually drained and overwhelmed by all the
commitments in your life.
You want to be having more fun and pleasure in your life,
but you struggle to stay up with your to-do list and often
feel like you haven’t earned enjoyment.
You have PMS, PCOS, fibroids, endometriosis, ovarian
cysts, infertility, or any other period problems.
You’ve already seen functional medicine doctors and
your regular obgyn and tried everything—acupuncture, in
vitro fertilization (IVF), birth control, other medications,
antidepressants, skincare treatments, diuretics for
bloating, ibuprofen for cramps—and you’re still not
getting the results you want.
You’re eating a healthy diet but you’re still having
symptoms.
You’re a mom with a tween or teen struggling with her
period, skin, weight, or moods.
You are in the first half of perimenopause and are
experiencing symptoms.
You’re not enjoying your relationship or sex life as much
as you’d like to be.
You feel disconnected from your body or feminine
energy.
You think being a woman means you’re destined to
suffer.
You want to live your best life, but need a sustainable
way to do it.
IS THIS BOOK FOR YOU?
This book is written for women, but some people who
identify as women may not have the biochemical or
physical makeup being explored here. What if you’re
trans, nonbinary, or taking estrogen or testosterone as
you undergo gender transition? You may not fit into a
traditional gender box. However you self-identify or
wherever you are in your gender journey, understand
that working with your unique reality is a gift that is
available to everyone. How should you approach using
the Cycle Syncing Method™ if you’re transgender, for
example? For people transitioning to female, following
this program may help you feel more connected to your
feminine energy even if you’re not menstruating. For
those who are transitioning to male but still
menstruating, you may prefer to get in tune with the
more linear, 24-hour male pattern. In that case, you
may not want to follow a cyclical program. The bottom
line is that it’s entirely up to you.
In these pages, you’ll meet some of the amazing real-life
women who have adopted this program and not only have
found solutions to their hormonal problems, but also have
unlocked their potential—gaining the confidence to do the
things they’d always dreamed of doing. You can gain this
confidence, too.
Once you understand the concept, it’s all very simple. You
just need to cut through the misinformation and turn on the
power of your body and the time it keeps. After reading this
book, you will take with you the scientific understanding, the
tactical plan, and the inspiration to change your life
immediately.
In addition to these practical benefits for your health and
productivity, you’ll gain the opportunity to come home to
yourself—to heal the wounds of feminine disconnection. We
have tried to survive in a noninclusive culture for too long by
compromising too much of ourselves. We don’t have to
squeeze ourselves into this paradigm. What women are in
desperate need of now is a female-centered framework for
how to live. That’s where this book comes in.
This book:
will give you the freedom and permission to do what’s
right for you more of the time.
will end the confusion about how your hormones work
and how they affect more than your period and fertility so
you’ll know what to expect and what your hormonal
advantages are.
will teach you to biohack so hormonal issues never
sideline you again.
will give you a blueprint to use your hormonal
advantages to create a life of more ease, joy, and flow.
In chapter 1, you’ll discover the truth about the amazing
female body and unlearn some of the misinformation that’s
been keeping us confused, ashamed, and struggling with an
array of health issues. You’ll hear about my own hormonal
saga and understand why we’re so often misunderstood and
misdiagnosed.
Chapter 2 will describe the differences between the 24-
hour circadian clock and the 28-day infradian clock (yes, there
are two!), offering you a new approach to time management,
productivity, and success that will help you step off the
proverbial treadmill and start living in sync with your natural
rhythms.
Chapter 3 will explore the workings of the female system
and show you how your hormones affect your moods, brain
chemistry, immune system, energy, and more. The chapter will
remind you that whenever negative voices pipe up to deny the
power of your female system, it’s just cultural conditioning—
not fact—that leads you to doubt the workings of your body.
Science proves nature intended you to be in sync with your
cycle, so you can be confident in embracing this new female-
centered way of living.
In chapters 4, 5, and 6, you’ll discover how to apply the
simple, female-centered Cycle Syncing Method™ around diet,
fitness, and time management. This is where biohacking meets
self-care. You’ll learn how to use food to support your
hormones during each phase of your cycle, reveal the secrets
to getting better results with less sweat, and introduce you to
planning tools that will help you achieve more with less effort.
A Biohacking Tool Kit following chapter 6 introduces you
to approachable steps to balance your uniquely female
hormones and neurochemistry to troubleshoot period, fertility,
and other hormonal problems to transform your cycle into a
source of empowerment and wisdom rather than pain. I want
to help you solve your period issues, so you can start accessing
the amazing benefits of living in sync with your cycle!
Chapter 7 shows you how to navigate your work life and
reenvision productivity and success through the lens of
cyclical living and your four-part creative cycle, so you can
work in a more sustainable way—whether you’re an entry-
level employee trying to chart your career path, an
entrepreneur in the trenches of the start-up phase, a corporate
exec leading a team of hundreds, or a volunteer in the
nonprofit sector trying to make a difference in the world.
Chapter 8 debunks the myths we’ve all learned about love
and sex and delivers the ultimate guide to communication,
connection, intimacy, orgasm, and foreplay—all based on your
hormonal cycle.
In Chapter 9, you’ll find out how to let go of the pressure
to be the perfect mom at all times and discover how to
embrace the different emotional realities of all four phases of
your cycle.
Chapter 10 encourages you to embrace your feminine
energy and tap into your power, because your health, success,
relationships, and daughters are counting on you.
The Cyclical Promise
This is more than a book. It’s a language and a model for
female-centered living. It’s a reclamation and a positive
galvanizing force for women today to truly embrace ourselves,
making our point of view and our bodies the center point of
our self-reference. This book will be the catalyst for an
entirely new lifestyle for you regardless of your background,
age, or stage in life. We’re not meant to be in perpetual
productivity mode, pushing all the time for results. Nothing in
nature works that way. We simply need to get back into sync
with the four-part blueprint that our female body maps out for
us. Then and only then will we be able to pursue the life we’re
meant to live as women—liberated and free.
Once you discover this blueprint for yourself, you might
wonder why we aren’t taught this as young women. Wouldn’t
it be amazing to know all this from puberty onward? How
much more strategically could you design your life with your
best interests at the center? As frustrating as these revelations
might be, they motivate us to work toward a better future for
ourselves and for women and girls to come.
Now is a pivotal moment to seize this opportunity. Times
are changing—we’re in the midst of a long overdue, much-
needed shift in our perceptions of our bodies and in our
expectations regarding our health care. In the past few years,
in large part thanks to millennials taking to social media, we’re
realizing some key things:
1. The taboos and myths surrounding menstrual periods are
outdated, false, and a tool of patriarchal oppression that
holds us back.
2. Hormones affect everything beyond our periods—our
moods, creativity, energy, and more.
3. Our menstrual needs are not being effectively addressed
by conventional health care services.
4. Our hormonal cycle is not being adequately factored into
emerging conversations in functional medicine and
biohacking, or medical research.
As we work to reduce gender disparity in the workplace
and in society in general, this desire for adequate care for our
hormonal needs might be the final frontier of smashing the
patriarchy. After menstrual mainstreaming, women deserve
more: more transparency in information about birth control
side effects, more health care options for menstrual problems,
more gender-tailored biohacking suggestions and research.
We deserve better.
We deserve to live on our own terms and on our own time.
Part 1
Our Bodies, Our Time
It takes years as a woman to unlearn what you have been
taught to be sorry for.
—AMY POEHLER
Chapter 1
Ending Your Mys-education
Girls are taught to view their bodies as unending
projects to work on, whereas boys from a young
age are taught to view their bodies as tools to
master the environment.
—GLORIA STEINEM
I
remember it vividly—the day we were finally getting to the
human reproduction section of our textbook in eighth-grade
biology class. I loved my teacher, Mr. Bing. I loved school.
And I loved biology most of all. For me, it represented the
intersection of philosophy, art, and nature—I was perfectly
suited to its study. I was expecting a banner day in class. We
began as we always did, with Mr. Bing giving a brief
introduction to the subject, followed by a fifteen-minute period
to read the related section in the textbook, then discussion,
questions, and a project assignment. In the past, these
assignments included replicating a DNA model, making a
cross-section of a cell, and dissecting cow eyeballs and frogs.
One of my favorite projects involved selecting a tree to
observe from winter to spring bloom and collecting samples of
the development from bud to flower, pressing them, and
sketching the components of the plants. The project taught me
a lot about the natural rhythm of life—waiting for a tiny seed
to grow, then watching it bloom and finally wither away. That
lesson stuck with me, but as much as I liked that one, this
day’s subject was on a whole other level. I sat at my desk,
barely able to control my excitement as Mr. Bing introduced
the topic—human reproduction. Then I got down to reading. It
just so happened that, sequentially, we read about sperm
production first. The language was potent—it read something
like:
The testes are powerhouses of efficient production. They produce two to three
hundred million spermatozoa daily. Each sperm itself is a perfect delivery
system for genetic material to the egg—the shape, the tail, the nutrients that
give the sperm its mobility and motility—all in perfect concert for its ultimate
goal—getting to the egg first to share genes.
“Wow! Nature is brilliant by design, and if I had balls, I’d
be proud,” I thought.
I moved on to the section about women’s reproduction. I
couldn’t wait to read about the incredible inner workings of
my own body. But what I got was something like this:
After the development and release of one egg from the ovary, the female
reproductive process is twofold. In the case of conception, the lining thickens,
the uterus grows, the placenta forms, and the miracle of life begins in the safe
confines of the womb. If not, then the lining sheds and is lost and the cycle
begins again.
“That’s it?” I thought.
I was struck by the change in tone, the light treatment of
the process, and the glossing over of the major things we do—
you know, bleed and not die, and—oh yeah—3-D print tiny
humans. No biggie! The textbook hinted at disappointment if
we didn’t conceive. It painted our hormonal process as
belonging in value only to those outside of us—men for
procreation, and babies for the 3-D printing. Sure, I was only
fourteen—what did I know? But I was the girl who was so
fascinated and excited about this phase of my life that I had
started the “Period Club” with my three best friends a few
years earlier after our very first sex ed class in sixth grade. The
Period Club had two main functions: (1) to share guesses
about which member would get her period first, and (2) to
justify frequent trips to the bathroom during lunch and recess
to see whether any of us had started bleeding. I was years into
being awestruck by the thought of my approaching
womanhood. I took the sex ed textbook’s lackluster
description of the female system personally. I found it hurtful.
And the disconnect didn’t stop there. I would encounter
this same weird tone and deeply disturbing oversight of the
obvious power of our bodies in every context describing our
biological process as my studies progressed over the years—
from Mr. Bing’s biology class to the hallowed halls of Johns
Hopkins University, where I went to college for my
undergraduate degree. From the mechanical descriptions of
how long a “normal” cycle should be, to the time frame given
for dilation of the cervix during labor—all was presented in a
dry, clinical way that was definitely not empowering for
women. The insidious implication, of course, was that if we
deviated from that standard performance, we were abnormal
disappointments of nature and needed medical intervention.
What I read didn’t just make me feel hurt. I was pissed.
Where was the description matching the positive view of
sperm production? I wanted to see a description that read like
this:
The female reproductive system is the crowning achievement of human
evolution and reproduction. Efficient and highly adaptable, seven hormones
work in symphonic relationship to cause four highly refined processes to take
place in a given monthly cycle: the development of multiple follicles,
ovulation, the building of the lining of the uterus (to prepare for possible
conception), and the release of that lining when conception does not occur.
When conception does occur, the process of gestation is absolutely
breathtaking. The rate of growth of the fetus made possible by changes in the
woman’s hormones, immune function, and metabolism is astonishing. And the
fact that this process is also beneficial to the mother is remarkable as well.
The process of labor and delivery—one that seems to pose extreme physical
danger—is the peak example of how women’s bodies transform into a channel
of power to safely deliver the baby and preserve themselves. The female body,
biologically potent, supports this menstrual and reproductive process by being
the more efficient extractor of micronutrients from food, by having the more
developed immune system, by having a slightly slower metabolic system to
retain nutrients for as long as possible before the elimination system gets to
them, and by having more connections of nerve fibers between the two
hemispheres of the brain. This biological precision ensures that a woman is
sensitive to herself, her body, her community, and her environment, so she can
make the best decisions for her well-being, as she is the one privileged by
nature’s design to carry the intense responsibility of creating the next
generation of humans. And when not creating a human, all of these same
systems support her in being a strong and attuned leader in her community
and in the world.
The fact that this isn’t what young people—both girls and
boys—are taught is tragic and JUST. SO. WRONG. As
someone who has spent her life studying the female hormonal
symphony and who has dedicated her career to helping women
get in sync with their cycles, I can tell you that any less awe-
inspiring description does not capture the truth—not even
close.
Many years passed before I stumbled upon the reason that
the female reproductive process wasn’t described in all its
glory, the way it should be. What I discovered floored me.
Quite simply, acknowledging the power of the female
reproductive process would shift the power dynamics in our
global culture. If we all agreed that, biologically, women are
not the weaker sex, then pretty much everything about our
societal norms would have to change to make space for
women to have equal footing. And it seems the patriarchy
hasn’t been interested in this happening. You don’t need me to
tell you about the thousands of years of female oppression
across every culture. But it’s eye-opening to realize that even
the education we receive about our bodies—from how it’s
described in textbooks to how it’s handled (or pejoratively
represented) in the medical community—not only supports
and deepens that oppression, but worse, also makes women
complicit as self-oppressors. If we believe that we’re destined
to suffer and that we shouldn’t expect our bodies to function
symptom-free, we won’t believe that we have any power to
improve our hormonal functioning.
When we do not know what is really going on with our
bodies—when our biology is our blind spot—we don’t have
our own legs to stand on. We don’t know who we are. We
don’t grow up believing we are gifted by nature’s design to be
fully equipped to lead. And because of that, we give away our
power in a thousand ways every day—from denying our own
nature by trying to fit into our male-dominated culture, to
suffering needlessly due to rampant hormonal dysfunction, to
holding back our potent life force because we’ve never been
taught how to care properly for our beautifully complex
system.
Let’s be real. Your sex ed class sucked. Media and
advertising messages hammered it into your head that your
period was something dirty you needed to hide. This
mythology and lack of education keeps you from appropriate
self-care. Our culture convinced us our bodies are projects to
endlessly work on, while boys’ bodies are power tools that
help them master their lives. Is it any surprise we’re out of
sync with our bodies? Because of this faulty introduction to
womanhood, we seek to suppress our biology because we
believe it will help us be more successful. And it isn’t working.
Everything you’ve tried to get rid of—your unwanted weight,
PMS, and breakouts—is a bust. Your efforts to move up the
corporate ladder or launch your own business compromise
your health more than you’d like. In addition to being
overextended with invisible work, actual work, and
motherhood, we add our drive to be perfect to our wellness
activities, too. What you don’t realize is that we struggle
needlessly, drained of the energy we need to create, because
we look for help from diets, healing protocols, and time
management tools that leave the female cycle out of the
equation. Most of the advice you’re following is intended for
men with the assumption—and it’s a big one—that the same
advice will translate to women. I’ve got news for you—it
doesn’t.
Our mys-education runs deep. And it has to end now!
The Truth Behind the Most Common
(and Harmful) Period Myths
Our mys-education is responsible for some very common
myths about menstruation that make us feel bad about our
hormonal cycles, our bodies, and about womanhood in
general. It’s time to set the record straight.
Myth 1: PMS is just part of having a period
Mood swings. Bloating. Breakouts. We’re told these
premenstrual symptoms are normal. News flash: They’re not.
This myth about PMS is very harmful because it forces you to
suffer unnecessarily. When you’re conditioned to believe that
pain and problems are par for the course, you’re prevented
from looking for solutions. The PMS myth does further
damage, as it is used against women to dismiss our feelings,
opinions, and judgments. People put us in the box of “being
hormonal” (as if men don’t have hormones too!) as a way to
devalue women.
The truth: Science shows us that PMS symptoms arise
only when there is an imbalance of estrogen and progesterone
during the luteal phase. This imbalance can be triggered by
diet choices—such as coffee, sugar, dairy, dieting, juice fasts,
and low-fat fads—or by the more insidious suppression of
feminine energy—the energy of change. According to the
National Institutes of Health’s BioCycle Study, the longer
PMS goes unchecked and untreated, the greater the risk for
cancer, heart disease, diabetes, and dementia
postmenopausally. When women live in tune with their cycle,
eating the right foods and nurturing their feminine energy,
PMS symptoms disappear. The premenstrual phase can
actually be a time of insight, clarity, and direction. It can fill
you with a can-do, get-it-done attitude and a desire to clean
house—literally and metaphorically. I have renamed PMS
“prioritizing my self,” and if more women did the same, we
would have far fewer premenstrual symptoms.
Myth 2: Cramps are unavoidable
More than half of all women of reproductive age say they have
some period pain for one to two days each month. Have you
ever caught yourself thinking you’re supposed to have cramps,
or that as a woman you were destined to be cursed with
painful periods? When you’ve been told your whole life that
period pain is just a reality to “deal with” or “get over,” you
accept it and don’t expect it to be any better. It’s time for a
reality check—you don’t have to suffer from cramps.
The truth: Yes, your body produces one type of
prostaglandin—PgE2—that causes uterine contractions and in
excess can lead to cramps. But did you know that your body
also pumps out two additional types of prostaglandin—PgE1
and PgE3—that are antispasmodic in nature and counteract
those contractions? Thanks to these natural painkillers, your
body effectively has twice the capacity to relieve pain than to
cause cramps. The good news is that when you consume the
right foods for your cycle, you provide the building blocks
your body needs to promote the production of the good
prostaglandins that ease period pain.
Myth 3: Being on the pill helps you regulate your
period
If you’re like most of the women I talk with, you probably
believe that you still menstruate when you’re taking synthetic
birth control pills. After all, many women on the pill bleed
each month.
The truth: What you experience when you’re on the pill is
not a real period. It’s actually a “withdrawal bleed” that bears
no physiological resemblance to the natural period that comes
at the end of your monthly hormonal cycle. You may be
surprised to discover that the placebo week found in most birth
control packs was created as a marketing ploy. In the early
days of the pill, manufacturers thought women would be so
disturbed by the idea of not bleeding at all that they wouldn’t
want to use it. That’s how the placebo week was born. For real
menstruation to occur, you need to be ovulating; but the pill
prevents this critical phase of your cycle. Without ovulation,
your gorgeous hormonal cycle gets stuck in a static low-
hormone phase and can’t create a period. Furthermore,
synthetic birth control does not correct hormonal imbalances;
it merely suppresses your own hormonal function and allows
you to go years or decades without addressing the root causes
of symptoms, which makes your overall health worsen. And
then there are all the nasty side effects to consider—and I
don’t mean just the ones listed in the little pamphlet that
comes with your synthetic birth control packet. In the
upcoming Biohacking Tool Kit section, you’ll learn that there
are many more downsides your gynecologist probably never
informed you about—for example, that the pill depletes
nutrients, disrupts your microbiome, and increases depression.
Myth 4: You don’t need to have a period
Every few years, an article will come out claiming that there’s
no reason for modern-day women to have a period and that we
would actually be better off and healthier if we didn’t bleed on
a monthly basis. Some ob-gyns give their patients the green
light to toss the placebos and take the active birth control pills
continuously to skip bleeding indefinitely.
The truth: Yes, it’s amazing that as a species we’ve
discovered how to outsmart our bodies by suppressing our
cycle, but that doesn’t mean we should. Nature is infinitely
more intelligent than we are and gave us the gift of the cycle
as a way to protect our long-term health. Tampering with that
system by intentionally skipping your period comes with real
side effects and health dangers. Ovulation, and therefore
menstruation, plays an important role in safeguarding our
health for decades to come and protecting us from
osteoporosis, heart disease, breast disease, and dementia.
Every ovulation and cycle puts protective benefits into your
health “bank account” for the years when you stop having a
cycle. Our menstrual cycle is so critical to our overall health
and well-being that the American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists has decreed that menstruation is the fifth vital
sign, just as important as pulse, temperature, breathing rate,
and blood pressure. If your period has gone MIA, it is
considered a sign of a health issue such as low estrogen levels,
which have been linked to heart issues and bone weakness. If
you’re missing periods due to polycystic ovary syndrome
(PCOS), or if you have irregular cycles, it’s a sign your
hormonal system is off-kilter and will likely be accompanied
by symptoms like acne, mood swings, or weight gain. A
period that arrives like clockwork each month is just as
important as having healthy blood pressure levels at your
annual checkup. I recommend monitoring your period—
tracking the color and consistency, duration, and intensity—to
stay on top of your hormonal health. In the Biohacking Tool
Kit section, we’ll take a deeper dive into menstruation to help
you interpret the color of your monthly bleed, fix your specific
period problems, and have a happier cycle.
Myth 5: If you have a bad period, there’s not much
you can do
When you get a cold, do you just let it run its course, or do you
take action to promote faster healing? Of course it makes
sense to pop vitamin C, get more rest, and take better care of
ourselves. It’s odd that when we’re having period-related
symptoms—cramps, heavy bleeding, or spotting—we tend to
ignore our problems. We believe it’s our lot in life to have
painful periods, so we don’t do anything about it.
The truth: This way of thinking is the direct result of the
paltry education we receive about our hormones and what kind
of support they need, because the reality is you can do
something. You can take action, change your hormonal reality,
and have a better period. Just as you wouldn’t let your cold
linger unnecessarily, you don’t have to put up with problem
periods. With some simple cyclical lifestyle hacks—think
food, exercise, supplements, and the way you manage your
time—you could see results as soon as your next cycle.
YOU ARE A BIOLOGICAL POWERHOUSE
Women are inherently abundant by design. We can
make multiple babies, we bleed every month, we
produce milk—heck, we even secrete vaginal bacteria
that’s vital for a baby’s optimal gut health. Nearly
every function of our body replenishes life. For
example, check out the life-giving power of your
reproductive fluids.
Menstrual blood: Researchers have discovered that stem
cells found in menstrual blood may have the potential to
be used in treatments for stroke, liver damage, and other
conditions. Period blood doesn’t seem so “dirty”
anymore, does it?
Breast milk: New science suggests that nipples absorb a
baby’s saliva, which may program the mammary glands
to pump out made-to-order germ fighters the baby needs.
One study in 2013 showed that immune factors in a
mother’s milk change quickly in response to a baby’s
infection. It’s Mommy, MD, to the rescue!
Vaginal secretions: Bacteria in the birth canal seeds a
baby’s gut microbiome for optimal health. Babies born by
cesarean section, who miss out on this bacterial bath,
have a much higher risk of developing chronic immune
disorders, such as asthma, allergies, juvenile arthritis,
inflammatory bowel disease, and even leukemia,
according to a study published in 2014 that included two
million children over a span of 35 years. The medical
community is finally tuning in to this critical process; a
2016 pilot study that involved swabbing C-section
babies’ mouths and bodies with their mothers’ vaginal
bacteria showed promise for restoring the babies’ gut
microbiome. Now that’s pussy power!
Meanwhile, more research is being done on fecal
transfers—which involve transplanting fecal matter
from a healthy donor into the gastrointestinal tract of
another—to treat conditions like Crohn’s disease and
ulcerative colitis. Why not look to the female body’s
treasures instead? Our much-maligned fluids have so
much untapped potential. Who knows what could be
possible if researchers devoted as much interest to
women’s fluids as they do to, well, poop?
Life in the Boys’ Club
There’s no denying it: we have been living in a man’s world—
although, thankfully, with more women in leadership positions
in the private and public sectors, this reality is bound to
change, and soon. Our cultural values prioritize masculine
energy of individuality and linear progression at the expense
of all else, which is reflected in the breakdown of our
communities and the disregard for the health of our planet. In
addition, our foundational beliefs about our own health are
largely informed by research done by men, on male subjects.
Even our daily routines are all based on the 24-hour male
cycle. Yes, men have a hormonal cycle too! We just never talk
about their cycle, because we cater to it every day. We’ll learn
more about our own hormonal symphony soon, but for now,
let’s look at a day in the life of male hormones.
Male 24-Hour Hormonal Cycle
Morning: Testosterone and cortisol levels are at their
highest when he wakes up, making him energetic,
communicative, laser-focused, ready for sex (cue the
morning erection), and super-efficient at getting stuff
done.
Afternoon: Declining testosterone puts him in the mood
to socialize and connect with people. This is when he
wants to pitch ideas to clients, network with colleagues,
and meet up for a date.
Evening: Testosterone levels wane, making him more
sensitive to his estrogen, and generally more interested in
cocooning on the couch or finding other ways to quiet his
mind.
Notice anything? This schedule lines up almost perfectly
with the way a typical day in a typical life—male or female—
plays out. We wake up early and immediately start fielding
email. We spend the early part of the workday tearing through
our agenda. Then in the afternoon we continue to work
through our to-do list, though our productivity has already
peaked. After work, it’s happy hour—time to commiserate and
blow off steam! Finally, we collapse in front of the TV, ready
to relax after a day full of ups and downs.
Just hit repeat on this cycle day after day, 365 days a year.
It’s that simple. Or is it? Women’s 28-day cycle bears no
resemblance to this 24-hour schedule, but we have been forced
to live according to the male hormonal rhythm for so long we
don’t even question it. Have we ever stepped back to ask if it
makes sense to operate our lives this way? Hormonally, each
day is a new start for men, so we structure our workdays and
social lives thinking only about the day of the week or the time
of day. But women’s bodies don’t work that way. Our energy
is not static day to day and week to week. Our productivity
could be completely different depending on where we are in
our 28-day cycle. The time we feel most social isn’t dictated
by the time happy hour starts. And while men tend to recharge
in the evening, our cocooning period is tied to a certain time of
the month.
We’re overlooking a crucial component that governs the
moods and emotions of half the population—it’s no wonder
women don’t feel that they are thriving as much as they would
like to be. The lack of knowledge about women’s biochemistry
and cyclical nature extends to the medical community too. As
far back as 1995, a paper in Epidemiological Review noted that
medical research basically ignores women’s hormonal cycles.
This ignorance plays out in the care and treatment we receive.
All too often when we visit the doctor for our symptoms,
we are told, “it’s all in your head,” and are sent home to suffer
in silence. This treatment is especially common for menstrual
issues like fibroids, endometriosis, and dysmenorrhea. As a
result, women often are not properly evaluated or diagnosed
until years after their symptoms begin. I know. For me, this
process took seven years, and I had to bring the diagnosis
myself to my doctor to confirm my PCOS, because she never
considered it! Sometimes, we’re labeled “chronic
complainers,” as evidenced in a study by the American
Autoimmune Related Diseases Association, which found that
nearly half of people who were eventually diagnosed with an
autoimmune disease (remember, 75 percent of people with
autoimmune diseases are women) were initially told they were
“too concerned about their health.” Think about that phrase for
a minute. A 2010 analysis on chronic pain in women found
that health care professionals were more likely to dismiss
women’s complaints of pain as “emotional, psychogenic,
hysterical, or oversensitive.”
Instead of your health issues being taken seriously, you’re
told that you’re “hormonal,” that you were dealt the short end
of the biological stick, that your treatment options are limited
to taking the pill or possibly having surgery, and that
ultimately you should just accept that suffering and feeling
crappy is your genetic destiny. Can you imagine men being
told to be passive, do nothing, and just learn to live with their
symptoms? It’s unacceptable that women are relegated to
suffering. In her book, Doing Harm: The Truth About How
Bad Medicine and Lazy Science Leave Women Dismissed,
Misdiagnosed, and Sick, author Maya Dusenbery summed it
up succinctly: “Women’s symptoms are not taken seriously
because medicine doesn’t know as much about their bodies
and health problems. And medicine doesn’t know as much
about their bodies and health problems because it doesn’t take
their symptoms seriously.”
On the flip side, some physicians are quick to dole out
prescriptions—synthetic birth control that hijacks your natural
hormonal cycle, antidepressants that alter your
neurochemistry, and the list goes on. More than half of all US
women are taking at least one prescription medication, and
about twenty-six million are taking five or more doctor-
ordered meds. And that’s not taking into account the billions
and billions of over-the-counter pills, tablets, caplets, gels, and
other remedies we take to try to heal the side effects of
neglecting our cycles—acne, headaches, exhaustion, weight
gain, insomnia, bloating, and more.
Even the new trend toward biohacking—using food,
supplements, and more to optimize our well-being—falls short
because it doesn’t take our cyclical nature into consideration.
Just look at the diet and fitness industry. Can you show me one
trendy, well-known diet or workout that’s based on women’s
hormonal cycle? That’s because most diet and exercise
research has been conducted on men, not women. Check out
these sad statistics:
Women account for only 39 percent of participants in
exercise studies.
When the XX-chromosome crowd does make the cut in
sports and exercise research, we are often studied only
during the first half of our cycle, when hormone levels
are low, or only if we’re taking hormonal birth control.
In fact, women have been historically underrepresented in
all health, drug, and biological research. Here’s a quick
timeline of some of the most foundational health research and
the shocking absence of women.
The year 1958: A trial on the physical and cognitive
changes and chronic diseases that come with natural
aging called the Baltimore Longitudinal Study of Aging
was launched; for its first twenty years, it included more
than one thousand men and exactly zero women. It
wasn’t until 1978 that women were added to the roster of
participants.
The year 1973: The first study looking into the effects of
estrogen on the prevention of heart disease included
8,341 men and—you guessed it!—no women.
The year 1982: The landmark Physician’s Health Study
reported the now widely held belief that taking low-dose
aspirin can lower the risk for heart disease. The only
problem? The study tracked 22,071 men and not a single
woman.
The year 1985: By this date, the Public Health Service
Task Force on Women’s Health Issues concluded that
“the historical lack of research focus on women’s health
concerns has compromised the quality of health
information available to women as well as the health care
they receive.”
Today, we’re still trying to catch up. Why did women get
left out of scientific research while men became the standard
human representative in clinical trials? There are many
reasons, but here are a couple of biggies:
Men are preferred research subjects. Men have only
one biological clock—that simple, rhythmic 24-hour
hormonal circadian pattern—while women also have the
more complex 28-day cycle. Researchers have argued
that it’s easier and less expensive to facilitate for
experiments for the male pattern than for women’s
hormonal fluctuations.
A major drug trial on women went tragically wrong.
Another factor that played into our exclusion was a sense
of needing to protect women’s reproductive processes.
Birth defects from the drug thalidomide in the 1960s
resulted in the FDA adopting guidelines in 1977
essentially banning women of “childbearing age” from
participating in clinical research. These guidelines
effectively cut women who weren’t postmenopausal out
of the research game.
It wasn’t until 1993 when the National Institutes of Health
Revitalization Act attempted to change things by requiring
researchers to include women in human studies and to note
any results that differed in women compared with men. We’ve
made inroads since then, but “progress has been painfully slow
—stalling for long periods or sometimes reversing direction—
and, consequently, not nearly enough progress has been
made,” according to a 2015 review in BMC Women’s Health.
When you realize that our culture’s foundational health
research has largely excluded women, it’s easy to grasp why
our health issues are sometimes misunderstood and
misdiagnosed. The fact that many of the diseases that affect
women in greater numbers receive less funding for research
compounds the problem. Trying to fit into the boys’ club
actually prevents you from being oriented to your own body
and from doing self-care in a way that supports your
biochemical needs.
The lack of understanding of women’s health issues can
feel isolating. In our sessions, when we talk about the issues
my clients are having, women often start by saying, “I must be
one in a million, because I have this symptom.” And it’s a
symptom that I know is actually very common. I let them
know they’re not one in a million with their period problem,
they’re one of millions struggling alone and unnecessarily
confused. The fact is that your problems are not the result of a
deficiency in synthetic hormones. The problem is twofold: (1)
we don’t talk enough about the epidemic of women’s chronic
hormonal problems, and (2) the one-size-fits-all health care,
fitness, and life management advice we’re getting doesn’t fit
all—it’s designed primarily for the male hormonal ecosystem.
The solution is to redefine women’s health care, time
management, and our concept of success from a totally
female-centered standpoint. That’s the only way you’re going
to live your best life. Even if you don’t suffer from any
hormonal health issues, honoring your cyclical nature is the
only way to take advantage of all the gifts your body
inherently offers.
My Hormone Story
I know firsthand how stressful hormonal problems can be. I
struggled with them for a decade, and my journey with a
debilitating hormonal condition changed my career and my
life. My issues started in junior high school. I was a very late
bloomer in the puberty department. Even though I was the
president and founder of the Period Club, I was the last one in
the club to actually start my period. I was almost sixteen when
I got my first bleed, although it was brown and not healthy. I
went to my gynecologist annually but was offered no
diagnosis or explanation for the laundry list of issues I was
having. Meanwhile, my symptoms worsened throughout high
school and in college. At one point, I tipped the scales at 205
pounds; my face, chest, and back were covered in severe,
painful cystic acne; and I hadn’t had my period more than a
handful of times in a decade. Things got so bad for me, I
couldn’t sleep, I binged on food to deal with fatigue and
anxiety, I felt depressed, and I struggled to do basic things like
be on time for appointments and stick with plans to go out
with friends. I was a mess and felt trapped in my own body.
One night when I was suffering with my usual insomnia, I
headed to the library at Johns Hopkins, where I was a student,
and I came across a brief article in an obstetrics journal about
Stein-Leventhal disease, which is now called polycystic ovary
syndrome (PCOS). As I scanned the symptoms associated with
this condition, I recognized myself immediately. “This is it,” I
thought!
In my book WomanCode, I described in detail how that
discovery prompted me to demand that my gynecologist give
me a test to diagnose PCOS—a transvaginal ultrasound along
with bloodwork. When the test revealed the telltale signs of
PCOS—multiple cysts on both of my ovaries—I finally knew
what was causing all of my issues. It suddenly made sense to
me that all the diets, exercise, and skin care treatments hadn’t
worked for me. My symptoms weren’t caused by my not
trying hard enough; my hormonal system was so severely out
of tune that no ordinary diet or skin cream was going to help.
My prognosis was grim—a lifetime of cystic acne and an
increased risk for obesity, diabetes, infertility, heart disease,
and cancer. As I sat in stunned silence, the doc dispassionately
informed me there was no cure, only a litany of prescriptions
—birth control pills to artificially regulate my period,
Accutane for acne, Glucophage for insulin problems,
Aldactone for hirsutism issues, blood pressure medicine,
Clomid when it came time to conceive, and on and on—that I
would likely have to take for the rest of my life. The message
was clear: go home and suffer quietly.
As I was reeling from the notion of a lifetime of pills and
problems, a voice welled up from deep inside, calmly
reassuring me: “That’s not your path.” My body was sending
me a strong message that there had to be a better way. I didn’t
realize it in that moment, but looking back, my body was
letting me know I had the power to do something, to change
my hormonal situation and create a better future for myself. In
that moment, I made the switch from having a passive
relationship with my body to becoming a champion for my
health and well-being. I was in a fight for my quality of life,
literally, and if traditional medicine was going to leave me
unsupported, I’d look elsewhere for a remedy. For the next
two years, I embarked on an exploratory journey to learn as
much as I could from experts in a variety of health specialties,
including naturopaths, herbalists, and acupuncturists. I tried
elimination diets, candida diets, herbs, and supplements, and
nothing worked for me. Although these therapies can provide
relief for many conditions, they didn’t heal my hormonal
problems. In fact, my condition continued to worsen.
Out of desperation, I went on the pill, but after just ten
days I temporarily lost vision in one eye from an ocular
migraine and suffered a cardiac episode of low blood pressure
and heart palpitations. After medical evaluation, I was told to
avoid synthetic birth control. Finally, after exhausting all of
the existing treatments, I tapped into my inner strength as a
researcher (I had studied biology and wanted to become an ob-
gyn) and began looking into the endocrine system, epigenetics,
circadian patterns of the body and hormones (chronobiology),
and the five-phase theory from Chinese medicine. My findings
encouraged me to experiment and create a revolutionary new
way of eating that ultimately put my symptoms and condition
into remission naturally. This is the basis of the FLO protocol I
described in WomanCode, which includes using food to
stabilize your blood sugar levels and insulin, reduce cortisol
levels, restore microbial balance in the gut, and improve the
breakdown of estrogen in the liver.
Within nine months of following this protocol, my period
came back, I lost sixty pounds, my skin cleared up, and my
mood and life were transformed. I was beyond thrilled with
this transformation, but my journey wasn’t over. I needed to
find a way to maintain the changes I had made, and I wanted
to get in touch with my cyclical nature by reclaiming a female-
centered way of living. The Cycle Syncing Method™ was born
from these two fundamental needs. The method is based on the
extraordinary blueprint for self-care, biohacking, and
optimization on every level provided by our cyclical hormonal
patterns. The method allows us to stay connected to our
feminine energy despite the cultural conditioning that dictates
a linear, repetitive way of living. I certainly wish somebody
had taught me about my cyclical nature when I was a little girl.
Where was the textbook that had this description of our female
process?
On the day when you start your first period, you’ll be entering a wondrous,
cyclical phase of your life. Your second biological clock becomes activated.
Your body’s cyclical nature empowers you with an abundance of gifts and
offers a clear road map to take advantage of each of them at the most
opportune time. Syncing with your cycle is the simplest, most effective way to
enhance your hormonal health and create sustainable success in all areas of
your life—career, relationships, sex, and motherhood.
Can you imagine reading something like this when you
were a preteen, and the influence it might have had on your
self-esteem and sense of how you could thrive in our society?
How might information about syncing with your cycle have
shaped the way you think about your body, your period, and
your hormonal patterns? How might that information have
impacted the way you approach every aspect of your life? I’m
convinced that living in tune with our cyclical nature is the key
to optimal living for women. Honoring yourself as a cyclical
being isn’t just about achieving better hormonal health; it can
boost every area of your life. I’ve seen this transformation
happen to thousands of women around the world. This book is
based on the work I’ve been doing for the past two decades at
the FLO Living Hormone Center, a first-of-its-kind company
dedicated to modernizing menstrual health care. The FLO
Living Hormone Center gives women around the world virtual
access to products and programs like the MyFLO app that help
them evaluate their hormonal problems, track their symptoms,
and naturally address their hormone imbalances. And women
can talk at length with a hormone coach about their issues and
learn about the benefits of getting in sync with their cyclical
nature.
SIDE EFFECTS OF SYNCING WITH YOUR
CYCLE
Finding yourself building energy, not draining it
Finding yourself in the right place at the right time more
often
Feeling really good about who you are
Feeling good in your body all month
Feeling powerful and confident
Having time work for you, rather than twisting yourself
around for time
Feeling less stress, but getting more done
Effortlessly maintaining a healthy weight
Deriving more enjoyment from your work
Feeling aligned with the process of creation
Not feeling so much pressure to be perfect
Feeling like your body is a clear channel for your passion
and purpose to come through
Living in harmony with your nature makes you healthier,
happier, and symptom-free, and allows you to pursue your
creative and career passions more successfully and
sustainably. Syncing with your cycle is the ultimate biohack
for women’s health and success. Like your cycle, this biohack
is efficient, elegant, and direct. All you have to do is access
what’s already inside you.
Biohacking, Functional Medicine, and
the Cycle Syncing Method™—What’s
the Difference?
Most women I connect with all have a similar adverse reaction
to the term biohacking. There is something about the word that
feels invasive, and I think that our collective unconscious
wounding around our physical safety has us balk at this term
on an emotional level. We don’t want to be hacked into or
hack into ourselves. It feels intrusive and violent, acting
against the body’s propensities and—possibly—its permission.
However, biohacking really is a term that can be used to
describe a proactive relationship with your body, its systems,
and your health. Let’s reclaim this term, which has tremendous
positive advantages, and understand the different types of
biohacking available.
Biohacking, in the wellness community, is using devices,
supplements, food, and lifestyle modifications to change the
performance of an already normally functioning body system
with the aim of enhancing physical performance and
achievement in other areas of your life. Its goal is to push the
limits of what can be achieved in the 24-hour window. On the
positive side, biohacking is about trying to increase the
performance of the body beyond its points of natural limitation
or to respond better to its environment—for example, using
caffeine to increase energy or concentration, or using
adaptogens to improve its stress response. It can go as far as
genetic modification and device implantation in the body.
Some of these are necessary, like artificial valve replacements
in the heart or robotic limbs, but I’m talking more about the
nonessential versions of these, like chips implanted in the
body to track your activity. I think it is part of our nature and
our culture to continue to figure out how we can outsmart
nature’s processes and succeed in spite of our body’s
limitations.
Functional medicine involves a variety of testing followed
by food and supplement modification to heal a body system
that is in crisis, restoring homeostasis so that the body can
perform normally. For example, if you have a diagnosis of
PCOS or fibroids, there is an imbalance in the endocrine
system that needs support. Initial healing work is essential to
get your body back to normal endocrine performance. This is a
form of biohacking to restore homeostasis and health.
The Cycle Syncing Method™ is about working with your
body’s natural processes to both optimize your health and your
life without adding anything to the body system. Because you
have a second clock, you have an internal code, or “preferred
performance pattern,” in your body. All you have to do to feel
the best possible way and to live the life you want for yourself
is to align with this pattern and support it as much as you can.
You don’t have to try to extend your energy in a 24-hour
pattern, because you have the expanse of 28 days to play with.
When you run out of energy today, you can stop and rest,
knowing that you have a whole variety of energy and
creativity to play with over the whole month. This form of
biohacking is about aligning with your body’s biological
rhythms, and it’s much more collaborative, grounding,
anxiety-reducing, and embracing of your feminine energy.
Free Your Feminine Energy for Change
Today’s patriarchal society doesn’t really offer a clear space
for this powerful female energy that creates continuous
change. But you can make space in your own life the way I did
—carefully, thoughtfully, intentionally. I let the truth of
science guide me. And science shows me that I am designed to
be strong, emotionally attuned, analytical, insightful, creative,
playful, nurturing, spontaneous, dynamic, and reliable. Only
when we learn how to leverage our natural patterns are we
able to thrive in our bodies, our careers, and our relationships,
so we can live our optimal lives.
When enough women tap into this personal power, we can
collaborate and begin to drive change in our culture to reflect
our needs and values of sustainability and well-being—
increasingly critical issues for a society moving toward
increased dependence on technology and increased damage to
our environment. As we head into a future in which more
women are rising to positions of power, it is more important
than ever to make sure our education about how we self-
reference and perform self-care matches the truth of our
biology and empowers us. We need to give ourselves
permission to lead like women and embrace our dynamic
energy to help us champion the changes our world so clearly
needs.
I’m constantly surprised that every women’s event or
conference—whether focused on business or wellness—does
not always include panels, segments, or presentations about
hormones and mental health, hormones and energy, or
hormones and wellness. I’m always so happy when the people
in charge of the conference realize this topic has been left out
inadvertently and create some space for it. As we include this
in our conversations, we shift how we feel about our female
biochemistry.
In fact, we live in an amazing time for periods! Millennials
and celebrities are opening up on social media and other
platforms about their experiences riding the “crimson wave”
and are truly breaking down all the bloody barriers that hold us
back from knowing how our bodies work and what’s possible
for them. But it’s also a fascinating time as next-generation
advances in technology—think artificial intelligence (AI),
artificial simulation of the menstrual cycle, and “BioBags” to
grow babies outside the uterus—seem to be paving the way for
a future where life can be created artificially in response to the
decline in everyone’s hormonal health. It’s up to us to protect
our hormones and our cycles now and for the seven future
generations genetically affected by the self-care choices we
make today.
This is the conversation we need to have, not the one we
got in our severely inadequate sex ed class, not the one about
the “curse.” I actually count myself lucky that as a preteen I
never got “the talk” from my mom. She never mentioned one
word about menstruation to me. But because I didn’t get the
talk, I had no preconceived notions about menstruation being
dirty or something to be ashamed of. So when I heard about
this mysterious monthly visitor for the first time in my sixth-
grade class (a few years before Mr. Bing’s biology class), I
was absolutely enchanted. “Ah-mazing!” I thought. I couldn’t
wait to start having a cycle. My organic reaction to the idea of
having a period was utter joy and enthusiasm. I thought of it as
a gift, not a curse. That’s the experience I want for you and for
all women—to find the joy in our cycles and to use it to heal
our symptoms and help us live our best lives.
Chapter 2
Break Free from the 24-Hour
Clock
The psyches and souls of women also have their
own cycles and seasons of doing and solitude,
running and staying, being involved and being
removed, questing and resting, creating and
incubating, being of the world and returning.
—CLARISSA PINKOLA ESTÉS
I
think we’re all wired to try to figure out how to be happy. I
remember that in my quest for happiness, I stumbled across an
important concept: most of us are going about being happy the
wrong way. It’s the “have-do-be” concept. Essentially, we
believe, as I sure did, that once I had acquired a goal (like the
perfect weight, or the right job, or quality friends), then I’d do
all the things I wanted to do (like wear a bikini to the beach,
have lots of money to spend, go out and do fun things), and
then finally I’d be happy! The truth is, however, that the
process works in the opposite direction. While I understood
this concept intellectually, it was a whole other thing to
actually live it. I’m from New England—maybe there is
something in the water up there that makes a person want very
practical solutions to esoteric questions. I wanted to know how
to generate feelings of well-being and enjoyment consistently.
It turns out that the answer was waiting for me all along in my
biochemistry.
In the previous chapter I revealed how misinformation
about our biochemistry is preventing us from taking advantage
of the natural competitive edge women possess. In this chapter
I’ll unpack a fundamental truth about female biology that most
women are ignoring: while children, men, and postmenopausal
women are operating on a single biological clock, women of
reproductive age are blessed to have two powerful inner clocks
that create an organic framework for optimizing our energy,
nurturing our creativity, maintaining our health, and making
sustainable our productivity. Just as we now appreciate taking
serious care of our circadian clock, it is equally critical to take
care of your monthly hormonal clock, as you’ll see in this
chapter. Honoring both these clocks can help you access the
gifts of your cyclical nature so you can optimize your
performance and achieve more with less effort and less stress.
On the other hand, continuing to ignore your second clock can
ravage your health and make it harder for you to experience
more flow and ease in your life.
Chronobiology and You
I’ve always been fascinated by chronobiology. It’s the field
within biology that seeks to understand the cyclical
phenomena in organisms and their adaptation to physiological
rhythms. The term comes from the ancient Greek words
chronos, the word for time, and bios logia, the study of life.
These cycles are known as biological rhythms and they impact
anatomy, physiology, genetics, molecular biology, behavior,
epigenetics, reproduction, and even our planet’s ecology.
Basically, everything is affected by this action of cycles and
timing, and yet we don’t get exposed to this perspective when
we are learning about basic biology as we’re growing up.
Timing is essential for many key biological processes: from
sleeping to cellular regeneration and even bacterial activity, its
impact on your well-being is enormous. We should all have a
basic understanding of the timing of our bodies’ functions.
In addition to most of us not having a strong understanding
about this field of study, we usually only hear about one of the
timing cycles: the circadian rhythm and its connection to the
solar rhythm. Circadian is from the Latin words circa (around)
and diem (day), describing the solar cycle of one day. Of
course, there are some cultural reasons behind this cycle being
so well-known compared to others: the sun, from Greek
mythology to modern religion, has always been associated
with male power. Unfortunately, due to this patriarchal agenda
and the association between the menstrual cycle and lunar
rhythms, the menstrual biological rhythm has become
culturally devalued to the point where we’re not even taught
its proper name.
Well, here it is. Your menstrual cycle is an infradian
rhythm, a cycle longer than a day. There are also ultradian
rhythms that refer to cycles shorter than a day, like REM
cycles and growth hormone cycles. Lunar rhythms are actually
a separate cycle, and, from a chronobiological standpoint, they
typically refer to tidal activity. The facts that our bodies are 80
percent water and women observe a correlation between their
infradian rhythm and their lunar cycle mean that there might
be more connection there than we have research for currently.
However, because they have been associated together
historically and they don’t fit well with religious and
patriarchal values, we don’t know much about our biological
rhythms, and we ourselves don’t believe they have much
value.
But science transcends cultural narratives: what you’re
about to learn is a real and missing piece of your
understanding of your biology, and as such you can feel
confident in reclaiming your hormonal advantage and
revolutionizing your life accordingly. We’ve all learned how to
orient ourselves around a day and to connect with the timing
of the world outside. We need to learn to leverage our
infradian rhythm for our success and well-being—we need to
learn to connect with our inner timing.
Meet Your 24-Hour Clock—the
Circadian Rhythm
Let’s look at your 24-hour clock first. Inside all of us—women
and men—we have a circadian rhythm that regulates our daily
bodily processes, including digestion, body temperature,
metabolism, sleep, elimination, and the production of certain
hormones. This circadian clock kicks into action the day
you’re born, and continues ticking day in and day out
throughout your entire life. Michael Breus, in his book The
Power of When, explores how the circadian rhythm reigns
over your body’s processes—cuing cortisol to spike in the
morning to rev you up, boosting alertness in late morning, and
secreting melatonin around 9 p.m. to help you wind down for
sleep. Here’s a breakdown of how your 24-hour clock primes
your body for a variety of processes throughout the day:
In traditional Chinese medicine, the organs also have peak
activity times during the day, and practitioners use this clock
to understand which organs need extra support:
A master timekeeper, which is composed of a cluster of
about 20,000 neurons, is found in the brain’s hypothalamus
and keeps all of these internal processes in sync. For science
geeks, this structure is called the suprachiasmatic nucleus, or
SCN. Throughout human history, this circadian clock has
dictated our daily lives—prompting us to wake when the sun
rises and sleep when nighttime falls.
Our modern-day lifestyle, however, is increasingly at odds
with our inner clock. Ever since Thomas Edison patented the
light bulb in 1879, we’ve lived in a world of never-ending
bright light. Want to go dancing until 2 a.m.? Write your
screenplay at midnight? Eat dinner at 10 p.m.? No problem.
But when our lifestyle doesn’t sync with our circadian clock, it
can impact our well-being and has been associated with a
litany of physical, mental, and cognitive issues, according to
numerous studies. For example, a 2014 paper in International
Review of Psychiatry linked circadian misalignment with an
increased risk for cardiovascular disease, diabetes, obesity,
cancer, depression, bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, and
ADHD, and research in the Annals of the New York Academy
of Sciences found that any disregulation of our circadian clock
could potentially trigger metabolic, autoimmune, or mood
disorders.
CONDITIONS LINKED TO A CIRCADIAN
DISRUPTION INCLUDE THE FOLLOWING:
Cancer
Cardiovascular disease
Diabetes
Obesity
Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS)
Inflammatory bowel disease
Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD)
Ulcers
Gut dysbiosis
Small intestine bacterial overgrowth
Depression
Bipolar disorder
Attention deficit disorder (ADD)
Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)
Schizophrenia
Lack of alertness
Reduced cognitive function
Our daily timekeeper has been deemed so critical to our
health and well-being that three scientists were awarded the
2017 Nobel Prize, the world’s highest scientific honor, for
pinpointing the gene that keeps this daily timekeeper ticking.
Now that the rest of us understand how important it is to sync
with our circadian rhythms, we’re taking action to avoid
anything that disrupts our 24-hour clock. We’ve inadvertently
deregulated our circadian clock and have gotten to a point
where we have to biohack our lives to reverse the damage. Just
look at how popular those glasses that filter the blue light from
our tech gadgets have become. It’s common knowledge now
that the blue light from all our devices is messing with our
sleep. But many of us don’t know that blue light diminishes
the pineal gland’s ability to make melatonin, which can disrupt
ovulation and decrease fertility.
Becoming more aware of how critical it is to live in tune
with our circadian clock is great, but women need to
understand that we have a second clock that is equally
important. Unfortunately, this clock hasn’t received nearly the
same amount of attention from the scientific community or the
media. In fact, this second clock has been largely ignored, and
we’ve been left in the dark about its inner workings and its
profound impact on our health, moods, and performance. It’s
time to change that.
Say Hello to Your Second Clock—the 28-
Day Infradian Rhythm
As a woman, you’re blessed with a second clock, starting at
puberty and continuing until you reach menopause at about
age fifty. It deeply impacts your experience of life for
approximately forty years. This infradian rhythm is tied to
your monthly menstrual cycle, which includes four distinct
phases—follicular, ovulatory, luteal, and menstrual. The same
way your circadian clock plays a role in your daily bodily
functions, your 28-day infradian clock influences your brain
chemistry and physiology, providing you with unique gifts and
strengths at different times of the month.
28-Day Infradian Rhythm (aka Your Monthly Cycle)
Phase 1 Phase 2 Phase 3 Phase 4
Follicular Ovulatory Luteal Menstrual
7-10 days 3–4 days 10–14 days 3–7 days
Your two clocks are tightly linked. The four phases of your
cycle influence your 24-hour circadian rhythms, and vice
versa. For example, did you know that hormonal fluctuations
affect your body temperature, sleep patterns, and heart rate
throughout your cycle? On the flip side, your 24-hour clock
plays a role in how well your 28-day clock functions. Any
disturbance in your 24-hour clock can disrupt your 28-day
cycle, leading to problems such as irregular periods and longer
menstrual cycles.
As we’ve seen, mountains of research show that living out
of sync with your circadian clock can damage your physical
and mental health. The same is true if you ignore your
monthly cycle. Neglecting this vital inner infradian clock
exacts a heavy price from your hormonal, physical, and mental
well-being. In addition to the influence of endocrine-disruptive
chemical exposure, trying to fit into a 24-hour pattern by
ignoring our own hormonal needs is taking a dramatic toll on
our bodies. Just look at the numbers:
Five million women suffer from polycystic ovary
syndrome (PCOS).
Seventy to 80 percent of women will develop fibroids by
age fifty.
One in ten of women will suffer from endometriosis
during the reproductive years.
Nine to fourteen out of one hundred women have heavy
periods.
Ten percent of women experience period pain so intense
they can’t perform everyday routines.
Twelve percent of women of reproductive age have
difficulty getting pregnant or carrying a pregnancy to
term.
About 600,000 women undergo a hysterectomy every
year.
Women are five to eight times more likely to have thyroid
problems.
More than 75 percent of all people diagnosed with
autoimmune diseases are women.
As many as 50 million women suffer from one or more
neglected chronic pain conditions.
Women are twice as likely as men to have chronic fatigue
syndrome.
Women account for up to 90 percent of all people with
fibromyalgia.
Eighty-five percent of chronic migraine sufferers are
women.
About two-thirds of Alzheimer’s disease patients are
women.
Women in their childbearing years are more than twice as
likely as men to develop an anxiety disorder.
One in eight women experience depression in their
lifetime, twice the rate as men.
For optimal health and performance, you need to learn as
much as you can about your second clock and then nurture it
with phase-specific self-care. Syncing with your monthly
clock is the key to taking full advantage of your cyclical nature
for the three to four decades when it forms the foundation of
your life. Before puberty and after menopause, it’s your
circadian clock and static hormonal pattern that guide the
rhythm of your life and allow you to engage in more gender-
neutral biohacking. During your reproductive years, however,
you need to biohack like a woman.
A Better Way to Think About Time
When you have two biological clocks, you also need to rethink
your relationship with time and time management. Are you
struggling to balance career, family, friends, volunteer work,
workouts, and self-care? Are you constantly stressed trying to
wade through your to-do list? Do you feel like there aren’t
enough hours in the day to get it all done? Want to stop
worrying about time, get more done, and actually enjoy what
you’re doing? The secret lies in timing your life with your
second clock in mind rather than simply adhering to the 24-
hour clock.
I know what you’re thinking. Sounds too good to be true.
We’re all tired of the media telling us we can “have it all,”
when we’re just trying to get through each day intact. I
understand. I’ve got a lot on my plate: I’m a mom, a wife, a
daughter, a business owner, an author, and a speaker. I have a
vital self-care practice. I love to cook. I love to read. I can
easily get overwhelmed by my to-do list. The fact is that the
“you can have it all” credo is steeped in the conditioning that
women must “do it all” to earn love, acceptance, and security
in our patriarchal society. In a culture that ignores the wisdom
of our second clock, what else could we expect? However,
when you yourself insist in your own life that you orient
everything you do around your 28-day clock, the pressure to
do it all and have it all simply drops away. Rushing in to fill
the place of that pressure are discernment, desire, and an
increased quality of life. Before I incorporated my second
clock in my life, if I had a major deadline or project due, I
would just push myself to the point of misery and exhaustion
to get it done and deal with the health consequences afterward.
After I started orienting my life around my second clock, I
changed my approach; for example, when I came back on the
speaking circuit following the birth of my daughter, I’d
schedule those talks only during my ovulatory phases to make
sure I didn’t burn myself out too quickly.
This change is not some big thing—it’s a million little
moments when you include your female reality in the choices
you make, reclaim your sovereignty, and increase your
enjoyment and well-being. I know for a fact that I couldn’t
perform at a high level, or attempt to accomplish all that I do,
if I weren’t managing my time and energy in a cyclical
fashion. Before I realized I had to honor my second clock, my
hormonal problems had drained my energy to the point where
I was barely able to accomplish the basics of daily living. Just
getting off the couch to go to a doctor’s appointment required
a monumental effort. After years of syncing with my cycle,
I’ve learned how to plan ahead to stay in a peak flow state as
much as possible. I prime my body with cycle-specific self-
care and schedule my days, weeks, months, and year with the
four phases of my cycle in mind. I hold brainstorming
meetings on the days when my creative energy is highest. I
slot my speaking engagements for the dates when
communication skills are on point. I tackle detail-oriented
tasks during those times when awareness and attention are
locked in. I take stock of how I’m doing and where I’m
heading in the phase when changes in my neurochemistry
encourage self-analysis. Most important, this practice demands
that I make choices continually about what works for me and
what doesn’t. Making these choices is a huge departure from
what I had been conditioned to believe, which is simply that I
should do everything asked of me at all times. It’s not realistic
or healthy to have so few boundaries that there is no room left
in your life for yourself, your dreams, or your desires.
Let me give you another example of what cycle syncing
looks like in my life. In the days before my period, my energy
turns inward and I’m less inclined to socialize, start new
projects, or power through my to-do list. What do I do?
Instead of stressing about how to squeeze it all in, I do
something that feels pretty rebellious to me: I glance at my
list, pick the two or three things that absolutely must get done,
and move the rest to another day. That’s right. I cross them off
the list. Yes, it can feel a little scary to jump off the hamster
wheel when we’re so conditioned to always do more, but with
that one move, I go from super-stressed to relaxed. With less
on my list, I’m able to get in the groove on those few very
important things. And those tasks I crossed off my list have
been shifted to a day when my cycle naturally fills me with
more energy and more ability to tackle them.
As a result, I find myself in the flow on a routine basis. It
feels like I’m doing less—remember, I crossed things off my
to-do list—but I’m achieving more because I’m focusing my
efforts and supporting myself physically. I’m more creative
and more optimistic, rather than feeling overwhelmed. On
days when I do feel like I’m dragging, I know it’s because I’m
out of sync with my cycle, and it’s time for triage. I boost my
self-care with strategies you’ll discover in upcoming chapters
to help me fly through any challenging days. Most important, I
look at how choices I made, and boundaries I didn’t support,
left me feeling burned out.
Tuning in to my cycle opened my eyes to a whole new
female-centered way of thinking about time that allows me to
achieve more of what I want and enjoy the process along the
way by protecting my energy. But if you’re like most of the
women I’ve helped over the past seventeen years, your inner
dialogue reflects your single-clock lifestyle and its
implications for your physical and emotional health. In
addition to telling me about their hormonal health issues,
women also fill me in on their daily life challenges. You can
probably relate to some of the following things I hear on a
regular basis.
Check any of the following phrases that sound like
you.*
“There aren’t enough hours in the day.”
“My anxiety is through the roof.”
“Sometimes it’s hard to stay focused.”
“I’m overwhelmed by my schedule.”
“I feel like I’m short-changing my kids.”
“I feel frazzled.”
“I don’t have the energy to do it all.”
“I don’t have enough time for my relationships.”
The problem isn’t a lack of time. Ignoring your second
clock is draining your energy. The secret to achieving more
actually lies in doing less. It’s almost a radical thought in our
society, which forces the more-is-better philosophy down our
collective throats. The idea of less can seem downright
treasonous. But it’s backed by science. It’s time to let go of
these old patterns and get in tune with a female-centered
productivity paradigm that’s based on your biology.
Stop Ignoring Your Second Clock
You’ve been culturally conditioned to unconsciously believe
some truly flawed philosophies about time. Let’s look at the
biggest culprits and cyclical flow blockers and break them
down one by one.
FLO Blocker 1:
You’re watching only one clock
Time to wake up! Time to go to work! Time for dinner! In our
society, we’re all chained to the ticking clock. Most of the
women who come to me for help with their period problems
also suffer from the effects of trying to keep up with the daily
grind. Because they aren’t living in harmony with their inner
cycle, their hormonal systems are crying out for help. When
you’re dealing with painful periods, headaches, and PMS, it’s
so much harder to succeed in the male-patterned world where
productivity is king. We begin to think we suck at time
management.
Our entire concept of time is predicated on the male-
patterned 24-hour cycle—a straight shot to an end point. It’s
time to kick that concept to the curb. Instead of thinking about
time in typical chronological fashion, it’s time to adopt
something I call right-timing. The idea is to do things at the
right moment, not necessarily sequentially. That daunting to-
do list of yours? Instead of adding task after task in no
particular order, think about the best time—what the ancient
Greeks called kairos—for each item, and group your tasks
based on the strengths of the phase of your cycle. An
upcoming chapter gives specifics on how to do so and
provides you with a daily planner geared to help you include
both your clocks in your planning.
Ultimately, when you’re syncing with your cycle, you can
stop trying to master time and start thinking about managing
your energy. This subtle but powerful shift in your thought
process will pay off in a big way. The concept is already
catching on in the corporate world. In a 2007 Harvard
Business Review article, some forward-thinking leaders at
global consultancy firm The Energy Project explored the
effects of managing energy versus time. They wrote, “The
core problem with working longer hours is that time is a finite
resource. Energy is a different story.” They’ve found that
replacing energy-depleting behaviors with self-care practices
that recharge and reenergize is the key to sustainable high
performance without burnout. I’ve taken this finding one step
further to show that these energy-building strategies are
naturally built into your biochemistry and must be managed
differently for women in their reproductive years.
Here’s what I mean. Think of the male-energy paradigm
based on a 24-hour clock as a hockey puck being pushed
across the ice. The puck accelerates, decelerates, and
eventually comes to a stop. This is the energy paradigm we’ve
been conditioned to adopt: you go as hard as you can, as long
as you can, and then crash. The female energy paradigm,
based on the 28-day cycle, is cyclical. Which, like a wheel, is
arguably more powerful and efficient. When you stabilize it
and give it a push, it accelerates and gains speed, gathering
momentum naturally as it rolls. In fact, the industrial
revolution was powered by cyclical machinery, prized for its
ongoing efficiency! This is how your body is intended to
work. When you intentionally and strategically support the
four phases of your cycle instead of simply pushing through
your agenda each day, you’ll be gaining energy rather than
draining it. Syncing with your cycle keeps you engaged, and
you’ll arrive at your desired destination faster and might even
go farther than you originally intended. Your schedule
becomes a reflection of your natural strengths, allowing you to
get in the flow and perform at your best.
FLO Blocker 2:
You’re living in perpetual productivity
With right-timing, everything has an ideal moment. I learned
about that natural rhythm of life in Mr. Bing’s biology class
when I had to observe a tree from winter to spring bloom. We
are meant to live our lives in rhythm with this cycle of creation
—from seed to growth to harvest to rest.
Our culture, however, demands perpetual growth and
harvest. Trying to live your life in nonstop growth and harvest
mode is taxing for your endocrine system. The message that
you need to be in constant production mode puts you in an
impossible situation. You are pressured to strive for peak
productivity at all times, ignoring your natural rhythm. You
feel the need to do more even though your performance falters,
your health fails, and your psyche suffers. This relentless
pursuit of productivity—at work, at home, and in your
relationships—forces you to put yourself last on your to-do
list, if you even make it onto your list at all. Self-care goes out
the window. You skip lunch, you skimp on sleep, you fuel
yourself with double lattes. These make your endocrine system
go haywire, and once one of your hormones is disrupted, a
cascade of imbalances and a laundry list of symptoms can
follow. You can find yourself living with chronic stress,
adrenal fatigue, anxiety, insomnia, and more. In a vicious
circle, these conditions compound any existing hormonal
dysfunction. And somehow, you’re supposed to keep
producing at top speed anyway. How is anyone supposed to
function, let alone thrive, this way?
I’m reminded of something I’ve heard Oprah say, that life
will tap you on the shoulder until it knocks you on your butt.
Too many of us have been knocked on our butts. I think Oprah
would agree: everything in the right season!
FLO Blocker 3:
You believe being busy is a status symbol or a badge
of honor
When I ask women who come to the center, “How are you?,”
they often answer with something along the lines of “I’m so
busy, it’s crazy.” Think about that answer for a moment. We’re
so divorced from our feelings that we can’t even give an
emotional, let alone human, response to a simple question.
Instead, we provide a productivity update to connect and
commiserate with others. We’ve been conditioned to believe
that the more tasks and activities we have jam-packed into
each day, the more valuable we are. That was the conclusion
of a 2017 study in the Journal of Consumer Research, which
found that a busy and overworked lifestyle has become “an
aspirational status symbol.” We’re basing our personal
expectations on what our digital tools—computers, cell
phones, and other gadgets that can operate 24/7—can do. It’s
as if we’re aspiring to become machines that never power
down.
The trend is taking a toll on our health and performance. In
her book, Overwhelmed: Work, Love, and Play When No One
Has the Time, Bridget Schulte dissects how the cult of
busyness is leaving us feeling fractured, scattered, and
mentally and physically exhausted. We’re all jettisoning
ourselves from one task to the next, barely taking a moment to
breathe. And women may be more susceptible to this,
considering our days can be even more jam-packed than
men’s. Melinda Gates addressed the issue of “time poverty” in
the 2016 annual letter from the Gates Foundation. She singled
out the gender gap in the number of hours we devote to unpaid
work—think grocery shopping, kitchen duty, and carting the
kids around. Statistics show that globally women spend an
average of 4.5 hours a day on unpaid work, while men skate
by performing much less than half that amount. She wrote,
“Unless things change, girls today will spend hundreds of
thousands more hours than boys doing unpaid work simply
because society assumes it’s their responsibility.”
Racing through our to-do lists also leaves no time for
restorative, relaxing activities. According to the US
Department of Labor, men spend thirty-three more minutes per
day socializing, engaging in exercise, or watching TV than
women do. In a year, this adds up to more than two hundred
fewer hours of leisure time for women. No wonder we’re
exhausted!
A growing number of doctors and scientists are finding
that our over-scheduled days are leading to difficulty
concentrating, inability to focus, irritability, sleep issues,
mental fatigue, physical wear and tear, and more. Suzanne
Koven, an internal medicine physician at Massachusetts
General Hospital, hit the nail on the head in a 2013 column in
the Boston Globe when she declared that busy is the new sick.
“In the past few years, I’ve observed an epidemic of sorts:
patient after patient suffering from the same condition. The
symptoms of this condition include fatigue, irritability,
insomnia, anxiety, headaches, heartburn, bowel disturbances,
back pain, and weight gain. There are no blood tests or X-rays
diagnostic of this condition, and yet it’s easy to recognize. The
condition is excessive busyness.”
This is yet another detrimental effect of living in a society
that values relentless productivity more than anything else.
Being busy has emerged as the modern-day hero’s journey. In
mythology, the hero’s journey centers on a person heading out
on an adventure, facing an obstacle, claiming victory, and
returning home a transformed person. Today’s hero’s journey
revolves around endless tasks and efficient production, hour
after hour. Sound familiar? It should. Remember that
description from my biology textbook:
The testes are powerhouses of efficient production. They produce two to three
hundred million spermatozoa daily. . . .
If you’re wondering where our society came up with these
values, look no further than a man’s biology. Seriously! This
concept of never-ending production mimics the semen
production that takes place in the testicles. It’s no surprise that
the way we formed our society is based on what we’ve studied
most, which is the male body. We high-five goal achievement
and project completion, but we don’t reward rest, rejuvenation,
or enjoying the ride.
FLO Blocker 4:
You believe success requires suffering
Thanks to trailblazing women, young girls today believe they
can be whatever they want to be—president of the United
States, an astronaut, a tech CEO, you name it. Anything a man
can do, we can do bleeding. We’ve proven without a doubt
that we can do anything. I would just like to see women doing
whatever they want without incurring unnecessary health
expense. I would like them to have a framework in which they
feel supported deeply. Don’t get me wrong—working hard for
a goal is a very good thing. But what if we could incorporate,
from the start, the lessons many learned too late in life, that
compromising isn’t worth the cost? Women wholeheartedly
buy into the belief that we have to suffer in order to succeed—
in a way similar to the way we’ve been conditioned to think
we are destined to endure physical pain because of our
biochemistry. It’s sadistic to think this way. It’s time to realize
you don’t have to suffer from physical ailments, nor do you
have to damage your health, relationships, or mental well-
being in pursuit of success.
The same way you trim some tasks from your schedule,
you may want to readjust your concept of success and
productivity. Does productivity equal success? If you have to
give up all the things you love in order to rise up the corporate
ladder or reach a goal, is it really a win? If your endless
pursuit of an objective makes you physically ill—think
chronic stress, gut issues, or high blood pressure—is it really
an achievement? If you’re riddled with anxiety or wracked
with worry from constantly pushing, is it really worth it? What
are you really trying to accomplish, what void are you trying
to fill with this nonstop pursuit?
In Buddhism, there’s a concept known as the hungry ghost.
I think of the hungry ghost as a sort of black hole within that
can never be filled. In our culture, people chase goal after goal
or acquire shiny new thing after shiny new thing, but feel
increasingly empty inside. In Alain de Botton’s seminal book
Status Anxiety, he describes this constant pursuit of more as a
need for love. No matter what people achieve or how much
they possess, they still want more. They buy their first condo
but still yearn for the big house with the yard. They land a
promotion at work but are already plotting their next career
move. They lose ten pounds but feel bad that they didn’t lose
twenty. You probably know plenty of women like this—you
could be one of them yourself. Take heart. There’s a better
way.
FLO Blocker 5:
You expect to feel the same every day
One of the things that blocks your ability to access the gifts of
your second clock is the expectation that you should be a static
creature. You’re not. You’re a dynamic being. Like the rest of
our body’s biochemistry, our emotional energy levels expand
outward and then retract inward in a natural rhythm
throughout our cycle. Sometimes we’re more social and
communicative, other times we’re more introspective and have
a desire to be a homebody. Our society values outward energy
more than inward energy, so we tend to think we’re being lazy
if we putter around the house or that we’re self-indulgent if we
focus on ourselves. But these ebbs and flows in energy aren’t
about you being lazy. Feeling withdrawn can be a powerful
signal from your cycle to focus inward and take extra care of
yourself.
We all have this expectation that we should be able to
perform the same way every day so beaten into our heads that
when I tell the women who come to me for help that
respecting our fluctuations is key to getting in sync, they give
me one of those sideways glances. In all my years of health
consulting, I’ve found this to be one of the hardest concepts
for women to adopt. I have to reassure them that it’s okay—
make that great—for them to take a break from the grind to
check in on personal well-being. In fact, it’s mandatory that
you rest after a crazy productive period.
FLO Blocker 6:
You have a hormonal imbalance or are taking the
pill
I’ve said it before, but it bears repeating: if you have period
problems, PMS, bloating, cramping, or other issues with your
menstrual cycle, or if you’re taking synthetic birth control, you
won’t be able to fully access the gifts of your second clock.
It’s important to address your hormonal health. The
Biohacking Tool Kit will help you if you need period support.
YES, YOU CAN DO LESS. SERIOUSLY!
If you’re thinking the concept of doing less is
impossible in your deadline-driven world, think again.
I work with a lot of high-powered female executives,
business owners, and college students who tend to
respond, “Yeah, right,” when I tell them about this
radical shift in perception. Let me show you more
clearly how it can work. When I returned from a recent
business trip, I had twenty things on my to-do list. I
looked at the arc of my month and thought about what
would give me maximum efficiency and creativity
while allowing me to maintain a high level of self-care.
I also evaluated my task list and carefully curated what
was really worth doing based on what would be most
enjoyable and rewarding. Most important, I actively
ignored the inner voice that said I needed to do
everything to get ahead and to do it now. Then I parsed
out my task list and mapped it onto my cycle phase by
phase. Suddenly, it all seemed infinitely more doable,
and I went from feeling overwhelmed to feeling
energized.
The Cyclical Secret: Use Your Second
Clock
After working for close to two decades with women who are
suffering from hormonal breakdown and struggling with their
careers, relationships, and motherhood, I’ve realized their
struggles are largely the result of their not factoring in their
second clock in a meaningful way. Syncing with your cycle
will not only help you overcome your period problems, but
also give you the foundation to thrive in every area of your
life. When you reframe your understanding of your body’s
biochemistry and start incorporating your second clock, you
can stop pressuring yourself to be in perpetual growth or
harvest, stop struggling to manage chronological time, and
start pursuing your goals in a sustainable way that makes you
feel empowered and confident. And when you approach life
from your own inner timing, you will naturally find your way
to peak performance that helps you build energy and enhance
your health and wellness, not drain them. You’ll unlock your
creativity, find more pleasure in your relationships, and feel
more fulfilled.
Seeing how much of an asset your second clock is, and
how ignoring it has cost you so much from a physical,
emotional, and even spiritual point of view, can be upsetting.
Or this understanding could fill you with excitement and hope,
knowing there is a clear answer to your quiet question: “Isn’t
there a better way?” You may have a visceral reaction—
positive or negative—to this information. My advice is to take
these feelings and channel them into a new way of living
based on the scientific facts surrounding your biology. You
don’t have to wait for a major societal shift to take advantage
of your natural timing, gifts, and talents. You can start today
by setting your compass to your true north, and getting in sync
with your body’s monthly cycle and natural rhythms. I know it
can feel overwhelming to make changes on your own, so I’ve
created free resources where you can get in the FLO with all
the support you need at www.IntheFLObook.com/bonus.
Remember, finding your way to doing less, achieving
more, and being happier isn’t just about you. Every time you
take up the space you need in your life—for example, allowing
yourself to cross something off your to-do list, giving yourself
permission to rest and rejuvenate after a busy stretch of time,
or planning your day based on your energy rather than your
time—it heals your soul and chips away at our cultural
conditioning. And it provides an example for other women—
our sisters, friends, and daughters. By sharing what we’re
learning about our bodies, we can start building a global
community of women living in tune with our biochemistry.
And this female reclamation will continue to grow until the
revolution is undeniable.
GETTING IN THE FLO
Want to start practicing the art of doing less, achieving
more, and managing your energy so you can get in the
FLO? Try these simple cyclical hacks:
1. Take stock at the end of the day: How’s your energy? Do
you feel exhausted and drained, or invigorated, like
you’ve had a great workout?
2. Keep track of how often you say yes when you really
mean no. Boundaries become a problem when you don’t
fit yourself on your own schedule.
3. Take one thing a day off your to-do list and resist the urge
to fill that space with something else to do.
4. Dare to do nothing for half an hour or engage in a small
pleasure—take a hike, make a phone call, or catch up
with a friend.
5. List three things you can do besides work.
6. When somebody asks you, “How are you?,” try
answering with an emotional answer—“I’m feeling great
today,” or even “I’m feeling energized today”—not the
default setting, “I’m so busy.”
Chapter 3
Beyond Your Period—
Understanding Your
Hormonal Advantages
We must reject not only the stereotypes that others
hold of us but also the stereotypes that we hold of
ourselves.
—SHIRLEY CHISHOLM
E
ven though I’ve been helping women heal their hormonal
health and unlock the gifts of their cyclical nature for my
entire career, I still get excited every time I share the real deal
about our female biochemistry with someone new. I was
having a session with a college student. As I explained the
science of our biology and the concept of the Cycle Syncing
Method™, she responded enthusiastically and said, “This
makes so much sense. I really want to take care of myself. I
want to live this way. And I want my friends at school to live
this way too.” I am always moved when this concept clicks for
a woman, because it is such a reclamation of her personal
power. How beautiful that at such a young age, this woman
wants to unhook herself from her inherited cultural
conditioning, reclaim her body, and encourage her friends to
start living a cyclical life. I imagined how much easier life was
going to be for her and her friends—enjoying balanced
hormones and taking advantage of everything their
biochemistry has to offer. As we wrapped up our call, I
beamed, thinking about the decades of her life that would not
be compromised with the negative effects of imbalanced
hormones. If only it had been this way for me and for the
countless women who approach me after talks or reach out
online and say, “I wish I had known about this sooner”—to
which I always respond, “I hope there comes a time when no
woman has to say that, when we all know how to thrive in our
bodies from the beginning.”
If you’re like most of the women I meet, “the talk” you
received about your monthly cycle probably didn’t go beyond
the basics. “You’re going to have a period once a month, and
it’s going to be awful. Here are some sanitary products you
can use. Whatever you do, don’t get pregnant! Here are a few
condoms, but it’s better if you just abstain from having sex. Do
you have any questions? No? Good.” It’s not much. None of
the talk is dedicated to discussing the hormonal fluctuations or
the second clock that will impact nearly every aspect of your
body, brain, and moods for the next thirty to forty years.
Because the talk is so inadequate, we don’t have the
foundational knowledge to stand on to weather the avalanche
of misinformation we’re fed about our biochemistry, which
leads us to believe our bodies really are a liability. As a result,
we don’t feel confident discussing our cycles among
ourselves, so we tend to avoid the topic throughout our
lifetime. The misinformation and avoidance all add up to
unnecessary suffering and struggling in silence. Ultimately,
this patriarchal wounding forces us to go into survival mode at
puberty, disconnecting from our cyclical energy and
compartmentalizing our second clock as if it relates only to
our period and reproductive heath. Your hormones affect way
more than your uterus and ovaries!
It’s time to kick those myths to the curb and embrace the
beauty and power of our biochemistry. In this chapter, we’ll
take a deep dive into some legit sex ed that’s based on science,
not social conditioning. So grab your notebook and get ready
for the talk you should have gotten as a young woman and the
biology class you should have had in middle school. I am 100
percent convinced our bodies provide us with critical
guidance. I realized this long ago when I started listening to
my body and formulated the FLO protocol that helped put my
hormonal dysfunction into remission and continues to help
women struggling with menstrual health issues at
www.FLOliving.com. The more research I did, the more I
realized science backs up everything I was experiencing in my
own body. In this Biology 2.0 lesson, you’ll quickly discover
these key things:
We are not small men! I’ll introduce you to the
biological systems—your brain, immune system,
metabolism, microbiome, and stress response—that prove
our bodies function in vastly different ways from male
bodies. You’ll discover irrefutable evidence that our
biology has given us significant advantages. Although it’s
true we may not have the same height or muscle strength
as the XY chromosome crowd, our bodies function in an
exceptional fashion in so many other ways.
Our biological systems fluctuate with our monthly
cycle. Not only do all of our biological systems operate
differently from male systems, they aren’t static. Our
systems fluctuate in direct response to the rise and fall of
our hormones each month. Balanced hormones can infuse
you with energy, spark your creativity, boost your moods,
and turn your body into a glorious masterpiece. On an
even deeper level, you’ll be protecting your biological
systems in the long run to preserve fertility and possibly
prevent major diseases later in life, such as Alzheimer’s,
heart disease, and cancer. Yes, your hormones have that
much power!
Ignoring your female biochemistry and second clock
affects far more than just your reproductive health.
As we learned in the previous chapter, ignoring our
second clock can lead not only to period problems and
infertility, but also to major health issues. Here we’ll
learn what happens to each biological system when we
neglect our second clock and hormonal health.
Biohacking the female system requires you to be in
sync with your cycle. Considering our systems fluctuate
in response to our hormones, it makes no sense to adopt a
self-care routine that is the same day in and day out.
Diets, fitness trends, and skin care hacks are guaranteed
to fall short if they don’t follow your natural cycle. If you
want to manipulate your biological systems for optimal
performance, you need to biohack like a woman.
Meet Your Hormones
Your endocrine system is a powerful and complex network of
glands that work together to secrete hormones that regulate
specific body functions. The hypothalamus, the almond-sized
brain structure that acts as command central for your
endocrine system, receives a steady stream of data about the
hormone levels throughout your body. Based on this
information, the hypothalamus fires off one of two hormones
—releasing hormone or inhibiting hormone—to the garbanzo-
sized pituitary gland that is snuggled just below it. The
pituitary gland goes into immediate action, sending out
chemical messengers—aka hormones—to the other glands and
organs in your endocrine system. The pituitary uses a different
hormone to communicate with each of them—thyroid-
stimulating hormone (TSH) to the thyroid gland, parathyroid
hormone (PTH) to the parathyroid, adrenocorticotropic
hormone (ACTH) to the adrenals, and follicle-stimulating
hormone (FSH) or luteinizing hormone (LH) to the ovaries.
The target glands and organs interpret the message from the
pituitary and either increase or pump the brakes on hormone
production.
Here are the key hormones we’ll be learning to balance
throughout our cycle.
Estrogen: Produced primarily by the ovaries, but also in small
amounts by the adrenal glands and fat cells, estrogen is the
superstar of your hormonal cycle. In your reproductive
cycle, estrogen participates in ovulation and is responsible
for thickening the uterine lining in anticipation of a
pregnancy. Estrogen also plays a major role in many other
biological systems, and protects you from dementia, bone
density loss, heart disease, and high blood pressure.
Progesterone: Production of progesterone kicks in around
ovulation, when it gets to work on its main job of
controlling and maintaining the buildup of the uterine
lining in anticipation of a pregnancy. If an egg isn’t
fertilized, progesterone levels fall, and the lining is shed
through menstruation. Progesterone also counterbalances
estrogen and promotes relaxation, improves sleep, and
enhances moods.
Testosterone: Produced in the ovaries and adrenal glands,
testosterone is present in women in much lower levels than
in men. This hormone, which is associated with sex drive,
gets a slight surge during and immediately after ovulation
—making you feel more sexual at the time you’re most
likely to get pregnant.
Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH): Released by the
pituitary gland in the brain, FSH stimulates ovarian
follicles to mature. FSH imbalances can lead to infertility.
As you begin perimenopause, your FSH levels slowly rise
to a level that signals the ovary to stop releasing eggs.
Luteinizing hormone (LH): Released by the pituitary gland
in the brain at ovulation, LH triggers the release of a
mature egg from an ovarian follicle. Abnormal LH levels
are associated with fertility issues and PCOS.
Insulin: When you consume carbohydrates, your body breaks
them down and converts them into glucose (a type of
sugar), which is absorbed into the bloodstream. Your
pancreas secretes the hormone insulin in response to the
amount of glucose in the bloodstream—more glucose,
more insulin. This critical hormone ushers the glucose into
your body’s cells so it can be used for energy, and it helps
keep your blood sugar levels balanced. When insulin levels
are off balance, it can lead to blood sugar imbalance,
which is associated with menstrual irregularities and
reduced fertility.
Cortisol: Cortisol is the body’s primary stress hormone. The
release of this important hormone is regulated by the
body’s hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis. Small
doses of cortisol can be a good thing, but chronically high
levels of the hormone can disrupt ovulation, decrease
progesterone levels, sap your sex drive, and cause fertility
problems.
RESOLVE HORMONAL ISSUES FIRST
When your hormones are working harmoniously, they
allow you to unlock all the benefits of your biological
systems and feminine energy. But period problems,
such as fibroids, endometriosis, and PCOS, can
dampen your experience of your cyclical benefits. So
the first thing you need to do as part of the Cycle
Syncing Method™ is to resolve any hormonal issues—
this is what women do with us at www.FLOliving.com.
You’ll learn the specific steps to take toward hormonal
healing in the Biohacking Tool Kit section at the end of
Part II.
Reconnect with Your POWR
Your cycle phases give you tremendous creative force and
provide ongoing momentum in your life. In short, they are
your power source. To help you connect with your phases and
make it easy to remember the special focus in each one, just
think of tapping into your POWR—Prepare, Open Up, Work,
Rest. In chapter 1, I wrote a brief description of the female
hormonal system that I wish I had read in my biology book
back in middle school. I used the same positive tone that had
been used in my textbook’s summary of sperm production. So
here, ladies, I offer a breakdown of the four phases of your
menstrual cycle using the reverence and awestruck language
your cycle deserves. Take note, this will be a radical departure
from the description you’re used to, which says that your bleed
is Day 1 of your cycle. This notion is long overdue for an
update. Your bleed as Day 1 is a medical reference that
emerged from a time when only men were allowed to practice
medicine. It’s not the beginning for anyone who bleeds and
who lives the experience. Your bleed is the culmination of
your hormonal cycle, not the beginning. The only reason the
start of the bleed has been referenced as Day 1 of your cycle is
that it was assumed that the bleeding phase is the only one you
would notice or track and thereby make it easier for doctors to
reference. The confusion created by this exogenous labeling
diminishes a woman’s intuitive wisdom, devalues her physical
experience, and robs her of self-authority and self-governance.
The imprecise and deficient vocabulary available to describe
our physical reality limits our experience of self and breeds
doubt. Just as improvements must be made in research to
eliminate gender bias, we as women must describe and define
this physical experience for ourselves on our own terms as part
of healing from patriarchal conditioning, honoring our bodies,
and claiming our power.
PHASE 1: PREPARE
Follicular Phase
Duration: 7–10 Days
Phase 1 of your cycle begins directly after your bleed ends. At
the outset of the follicular phase, your hormones are in a quiet
phase, beginning to increase in concentration in the coming
days. The small hypothalamus in your brain has the very big
responsibility of kicking off this amazing process, signaling
your pituitary gland to shuttle FSH to your ovaries to help
some of the eggs inside mature. Your two ovaries, which are
each only about the size of a grape, contain your lifetime
supply of eggs, each housed in a fluid-filled sac called a
follicle. Fueled by the arrival of FSH, the follicles swell in
preparation. Estrogen levels begin to rise to initiate the
renewal of your uterine lining—the endometrium—so that it
can host an egg in an ideal environment later on in the cycle.
On a behavioral level, the follicular phase is a time of
beginning, a fresh start.
PHASE 2: OPEN UP
Ovulatory Phase
Duration: 3–4 Days
Over just a few days, a dramatic rise in estrogen, followed by
a rise in luteinizing hormone (LH), stimulates one lucky
follicle to mature fully and be released into one of the
fallopian tubes. The egg diligently makes its way down the
fallopian tube to the uterus where, thanks to rising estrogen
levels, the uterine lining has grown lush and a host of
protective immune system cells have sprouted. In conjunction
with the LH that stimulates the follicle to release an egg, there
is also a sharp surge followed by a rapid decline in
testosterone. The ovulatory phase lives up to its popular
reputation—it’s a period of feeling social and communicative.
PHASE 3: WORK
Luteal Phase
Duration: 10–14 Days
The corpus luteum (the follicle from which the egg was
released) grows inside the ovary, sparking the production of
progesterone. Estrogen levels continue to rise and promote
additional padding of the uterine lining. The rise in
progesterone signals the body to keep the thickened lining in
place in anticipation of a fertilized embryo. The rise in
progesterone also signals the pituitary to stop releasing FSH
and LH. Toward the end of the cycle, if the egg hasn’t been
fertilized, the corpus luteum is reabsorbed into the body in
utmost efficiency. After estrogen, progesterone, and
testosterone reach their peak concentrations, they begin to fall
to their lowest levels right before your period begins. (PMS is
a common—but completely unnecessary—part of this phase
and results from too much estrogen in relation to
progesterone.) Think of the luteal phase as a time of
completion, when you’re naturally inclined to finish projects
and tie up loose ends—you begin to turn your attention on
yourself.
PHASE 4: REST
Menstrual Phase
Duration: 3–7 Days
As the corpus luteum gets reabsorbed, progesterone
production drops off in sync. This triggers your uterus to shed
the endometrial lining. The consistency, color, and duration of
your menstrual period is a powerful sign of your hormonal
health. Estrogen peaks and then plummets before the bleed
starts as well, signaling your hypothalamus to get prepared for
another beautifully rhythmic cycle. This is an ideal time for
reflection and looking inward.
YOUR MONTHLY HORMONE TEST
Our monthly bleed is a critical biomarker of what is
happening in our biochemistry in real time. A few
years back, I inadvertently made TV history when I
appeared on the Dr. Oz show and used a variety of
juices and fruits, including mashed-up blueberries,
strawberry jam, cranberry juice, and prune juice, to
show the various colors and consistency of menstrual
blood and what it means for your hormonal health.
Think of it as a monthly at-home hormone test. (You
can learn what the color of your menstrual blood
means in an upcoming chapter.) In addition, we can
thank all of the phases of our cycle for giving us a clear
picture at all times of our hormonal health—remember,
it’s considered to be your fifth vital sign! If anything is
off-kilter, we know it right away. Cramps, heavy
bleeding, missed periods—these are the ways our body
tells us our hormones need support. I can’t help but
think that our hormonal system, so vital to the survival
of our species, has been tuned more tightly to give us
an immediate heads-up to imbalances and monthly
opportunities for improvement in self-care. You can
check what the color of your period is telling you about
your hormones right now at
www.FLOliving.com/what-is-your-v-sign.
Unfortunately, as you saw in chapter 1, we turn too
often to medications and over-the-counter drugs to
mask those symptoms, or we’re told that our symptoms
are all in our heads and should just be ignored. When
we learn to listen to and respect the messages our body
is giving us, we can make simple changes that support
our beautifully complex system.
Beyond Your Period—How Your Second Clock
Affects 5 Key Biological Systems
One reason we don’t think we need to seriously consider
the care of our second clock is because we’ve been led to
believe that it affects only our reproductive and menstrual
experience. Let’s end that misconception now—you’ll see
that the second clock affects every system of your body.
Biological System 1: Brain
If you compared female and male brains in a science lab,
you’d probably notice that the female brain is close to 10
percent smaller. Otherwise, you might not detect many
surface differences. But when you peer deeper inside with
high-tech images of the living brain, things start to get
interesting. Thanks to groundbreaking research detailed
in neuropsychiatrist Louann Brizendine’s seminal
bestseller The Female Brain, as well as findings in
neuroscientist and psychiatrist Daniel Amen’s Unleash
the Power of the Female Brain, we now know the female
brain functions very differently, with stronger networks
that foster communication, emotional memory, intuition,
and anger suppression. Take a look at some of the key
ways the research shows our gray matter outperforms the
male brain.
Larger prefrontal cortex (PFC): Women have a larger
PFC, a region that acts as your brain’s CEO and is
involved in executive decisions and higher cognitive
functions. Located at the front of the brain behind
your forehead, the PFC is involved in planning,
judgment, and organization. More volume in this area
is generally associated with an uptick in empathy,
impulse control, controlled risk-taking, and focus.
The PFC, which isn’t fully developed until our mid-
twenties, develops faster in females, which may be
the reason young women tend to seem so much more
mature than their male counterparts.
Bigger hippocampus: Associated with long-term
memory and emotional memory formation, the
hippocampus is larger in women, which may explain
why we never forget an argument, a wedding
anniversary, or a first date.
Smaller amygdala: The brain’s fear and anger center is a
small almond-shaped group of neurons within the
temporal lobes. Smaller in women, this points to a
greater ability to defuse tense situations rather than
getting into an all-out brawl.
Bigger insula: This area, which houses those gut
feelings, is bigger in women and indicates a higher
ability to listen to our intuition.
Smaller hypothalamus: Associated with sexual drive,
this region is smaller in women, which explains why
we aren’t as obsessed with thoughts about hooking up
at all times.
Bigger anterior cingulate: Greater volume in the female
brain’s decision-making and anxiety center tends to
make us take more time when making big decisions
and worry more than men.
Bigger corpus callosum: The human brain is divided
into two hemispheres, left and right, with nerve
bundles called the corpus callosum bridging the two
sides. Women possess more of these nerve bundles,
providing greater connectivity between the sides,
which allows us to harness the power of more regions
of our brain when solving problems.
What’s the main takeaway from all this brain science?
On a personal level, it means you’re brilliant in a
uniquely feminine way, and you can thank your female
brain that you are wired for leadership, empathy,
community building, problem solving, intuition, fairness,
and systems thinking.
How Your Cycle Affects Your Brain
Do you ever feel like you aren’t the same person day to
day—that at certain times during the month you feel
energetic and efficient, whereas at other times you feel
more inwardly focused? You aren’t imagining this. As
estrogen and progesterone levels rise and fall throughout
your cycle, your brain changes in response. We can thank
neuroscientist Catherine Woolley, a professor at
Northwestern University who has been studying
neuroendocrinology for more than two decades, for some
of the most enlightening findings on the effects of
estrogen on the brain. Her 1996 study in the Journal of
Comparative Neurology shows the female brain can
change up to 25 percent during the monthly cycle, mainly
thanks to fluctuating estrogen levels. Skyrocketing
estrogen levels during ovulation lead to a boost in
synaptic connections within the hippocampus, which can
increase mental sharpness, creativity, and communication
skills. According to a 2005 study in Behavioral and
Cognitive Neuroscience Reviews, an uptick in estrogen
enhances the release of serotonin, which is known as the
happiness neurotransmitter. This means you’re likely to
feel more social, verbal, and outgoing in the first half of
your cycle as estrogen is increasing. In the second half of
your cycle, when estrogen falls, those connections in the
hippocampus decrease and serotonin levels fall, causing a
shift in your cognitive focus. It would be very easy to
interpret these brain changes to mean the first half of the
cycle is good and the second half is bad, but that’s an old-
school interpretation of our cyclical nature. Each half is
equally valuable in different ways. Rising estrogen in the
first half of the cycle prompts us to be more outwardly
focused and to take care of others. Falling hormone levels
in the second half of the cycle balance that outward focus
by allowing us to turn our attention inward to nurture
ourselves. We cannot be in perpetual harvest or
constantly in service to others. Nature demands that we
take time to rest and attend to our own needs and has
built this balance into our hormonal cycle.
Your hormones affect your brain in brilliant ways each week of your
cycle.
What Goes Wrong When We Ignore Our
Cyclical Nature
If your hormones are imbalanced or you don’t care for
yourself in a phase-specific way, the gentle hormonal ups
and downs can swing wildly. Out-of-control hormones in
the first half of your cycle can cause you to overdo it with
all-nighters at work, start too many projects at once, or
experience stress and worry. In the second half of your
cycle, out-of-whack hormones can lead to brain fog,
leave you in a funk, and make you feel like you can
barely crawl out of bed in the morning. Because we
believe we are destined to suffer from hormonal
problems, we accept that we should feel bad and be
inefficient during the second half of our cycle, and so we
do nothing to reverse this self-perpetuating situation. But
life doesn’t need to go on this way.
Ignoring period problems—such as cramps, bloating,
and missing periods—that signal hormonal imbalance
will prevent you from taking advantage of the positive
impact your hormones have on your brain. Here’s exactly
why you need to implement the practices you’ll be
learning about in the next section of this book, so you can
maintain optimal hormone levels to prevent the major
negative impact on your creativity. Take severe cramps—
one of the most common signs of hormonal imbalance—
for example. As if the pain wasn’t bad enough in itself,
painful periods also lower your ability to perform
complex tasks, reduce your attention span, and are
associated with abnormal changes in the brain’s gray
matter, according to multiple studies in the journal PAIN.
Women with PMS symptoms have hormonal imbalances
that primarily impact two areas of the brain: the PFC, and
the limbic or emotional center. They may also experience
a drop in levels of the feel-good neurochemical serotonin.
With these brain changes, you can say good-bye to
mental clarity, good judgment, and stable emotions and
hello to forgetfulness, trouble concentrating, impulsivity,
aggression, moodiness, depression, and irritability.
According to the NIH BioCycle Study, the longer PMS
goes untreated, the greater your risk for dementia. This is
why it’s so important for you to get in sync with your
cycle and balance your hormones. It isn’t just about
getting rid of your cramps and bloating; it’s about
optimizing your brain function now and safeguarding it
for the future.
In the FLO Advantage
When your hormones are balanced, the natural ebb and
flow of your monthly cycle has a predictable and positive
impact on brain function and allows you to take
advantage of your unique gifts and talents throughout the
month. Here’s what the four phases of your cycle look
like when your hormones are balanced.
Follicular phase: The overall hormone effect on the
brain is one of openness to new things, creativity,
and beginnings. What do you want more of in your
life? Where can you set your intentions?
Ovulatory phase: The verbal and social centers of
the brain are stimulated by hormones. Talk about
what you want with everyone you speak to during
this phase. This is a good time for important
conversations. Connect with your community and
enjoy being magnetic.
Luteal phase: Your brain chemistry is optimized for
task and detail orientation and bringing projects to
completion. In the first half of this phase, you have
some energy to spend with others. In the second
half, focus more on taking care of yourself. Speak up
for yourself, say no more often, and set your own
firm boundaries—otherwise you may become
irritated this week.
Menstrual phase: As hormone levels quickly
decline to their lowest concentrations, it creates the
greatest communication between your two brain
hemispheres—the left analytical side and the right
feeling side. This means you are best able to
synthesize how you feel about situations with the
facts and determine the best course of action.
Schedule time for analysis and review and think
strategically about where you want to go in terms of
the big picture of your life. Is what you think you
want still feeling good at this point? Do you feel
good about what you’re doing in the various areas of
your life, how you’re spending your time, whom
you’re spending it with? Allow yourself to turn
inward to journal or reflect on where you are now.
You can get notifications of these phase changes
when you download the MyFLO app
(www.MyFLOtracker.com).
Biological System 2: Immune System
If something is going around the office, my husband will
inevitably get sick, and it will take him some time to
recover. I tend to get sick only after a long period of
being overstressed. Many of my female friends have
noticed the same thing. We seem to do a better job
fighting off common ailments, even if the kids bring
home nasty viruses from school. A growing body of
research is decoding why women have stronger immune
systems, and it isn’t just when it comes to cold and flu
bugs. We’re better equipped to fend off shock episodes
from infection, sepsis, or trauma. We’re less likely to get
cancer. In fact, the lifetime probability of developing
cancer is 45 percent for the XY-chromosome club and
only 38 percent for women, according to 2012 research in
Frontiers in Genetics. And women ultimately live longer
than men.
Our hormones play a role in immune responses.
According to 2017 research published in Hormones and
Behavior, testosterone generally suppresses those
responses while estrogen enhances them. Basically,
we’ve been gifted with a genetically and hormonally
enhanced immune system that helps us ward off
infections and disease—especially during our
reproductive years, so we stay healthy for childbearing.
How Your Cycle Affects Your Immune System
Have you ever noticed that you’re more likely to come
down with a cold right before your period? There’s a
biological reason. Your immune system responds
differently to infections, viruses, and flu bugs throughout
your monthly cycle. What you have intuitively noticed
about your body’s ability to ward off ailments is
confirmed by science. An exciting 2018 study published
in Trends in Ecology & Evolution on the cyclical nature
of women’s health found that during the first half of your
cycle, as estrogen levels rise, your immune system is on
high alert and ready to attack, giving you a great ability to
fight off infections and fend off illnesses. During the
second half of your cycle, when hormone concentrations
decrease, your immune system downshifts and is less
likely to mount an inflammatory response. I think it’s
clear these changes in immune response are intended to
promote pregnancy. Greater immunity in the follicular
phase keeps you in tip-top shape. In the second half of
your cycle, your immune system takes a step back so
your body won’t attack a fertilized egg as a foreign
invader. If your hormones are balanced, this shift in
immunity should be imperceptible—but if you’re
imbalanced, you’re more likely to feel run down or get
that bug that’s going around the office during this phase.
What Goes Wrong When We Ignore Our
Cyclical Nature
When we’re out of sync with our second clock, our
supercharged immune system can go into overdrive. With
so many women who are suffering from autoimmune
diseases, including Hashimoto’s thyroiditis, lupus,
multiple sclerosis, and rheumatoid arthritis, it’s important
for us to consider the impact of ignoring this second
clock. Scientists have discovered estrogen’s role as an
immunomodulator affecting some systemic diseases, such
as autoimmune and inflammatory conditions. A German
researcher writing in Autoimmunity Reviews in 2012
found that some women experience more acute symptoms
related to chronic conditions in the few days leading up to
or during their periods. Let me be clear: your cyclical
nature does not make you more vulnerable to
autoimmune disorders. But if you aren’t supporting your
reproductive clock by eating, exercising, and living in a
cyclical fashion, your hormones may be out of whack,
making you more susceptible to immune system stress.
In the FLO Advantage
Understanding the cyclical changes in your immune
system gives you the power to biohack your body’s virus-
fighting ability by fueling up with immune-boosting
micronutrients so you won’t fall victim to pesky cold and
flu bugs in the second half of your cycle. Increasing self-
care in the second half of your cycle, when immunity is
naturally lower, helps to offset that normal variance.
Working with your cycle also prevents estrogen
dominance, to protect you from developing autoimmune
diseases and to minimize symptoms. I’ve met with so
many women who were suffering from chronic
conditions and saw dramatic symptom reduction when
they started living in tune with their cyclical nature. The
Cycle Syncing Method™ shows you how to feed and
care for your body to promote a healthy immune
response, ease symptoms, and keep you feeling great all
month long.
Biological System 3: Metabolism
For our entire lives, we’ve been told that having a fast
metabolism is the pinnacle of healthy living and the key
to weight loss. Decades of research, however, show that
women’s resting metabolic rate is lower than in men, and
the difference isn’t attributable to body composition or
fitness levels. We’ve been force-fed the notion that our
slower metabolism is a problem we have to
overcompensate for with tremendous deprivation and
control. It’s time for a fresh perspective. Think of it this
way: nature encoded women with the ability to create
other humans and therefore made our metabolism far
more efficient than men’s. While men waste nutrients by
flushing them out of their systems quickly, women
conserve nutrients longer and extract more benefit from
the foods we eat to provide a more nutrient-rich
environment for the childbearing process.
The evidence is clear. You cannot biohack your
nutrition and fitness the same way men do. You need a
food and fitness program that caters to your female
metabolism. You can access more resources at www.Inthe
FLObook.com/bonus.
How Your Cycle Affects Your Metabolism
You may think your body should be a consistent calorie-
burning machine day in and day out, but your
biochemistry doesn’t work that way. Your ability to burn
calories varies with your hormonal cycle. That’s the
conclusion a team of British researchers reached when
they reviewed existing studies on how the menstrual
cycle affects metabolism in a 2007 article published in
the International Journal of Obesity. In general, rises in
estrogen tend to suppress appetite, whereas a dip in the
hormone, combined with elevated progesterone,
stimulates appetite. As a result, in the first half of your
cycle, your metabolism slows down, curbing your
appetite and conserving nutrients in anticipation of a
possible pregnancy. During the luteal phase of your cycle,
energy expenditure jumps anywhere from 8 to 16 percent,
according to foundational research from 1986 in the
American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. That jump
corresponds to burning an extra 89 to 279 calories a day.
Sounds great—but the British scientists were also quick
to point out that this seeming metabolic miracle usually
comes with a corresponding increase in appetite,
cravings, and intake, amounting to about 90 to 500
calories a day. In the second half of the cycle, our
reproductive nature is geared to meet the demands of
pregnancy in the event an egg has been fertilized. This is
what’s behind those food cravings and desire for
additional calories.
What Goes Wrong When We Ignore Our
Cyclical Nature
If you don’t eat in sync with your biochemistry, you may
drop pounds in the first half of your cycle and then see
the scale tick upward in the second half. Turning to diets
based solely on the 24-hour circadian clock to lose weight
isn’t the solution. They don’t take our cyclical nature or
second clock into consideration. In fact, as you’ll see in
the next chapter, many popular diets trends—think
intermittent fasting, ketogenic, and paleo—work against
our metabolism, and actually prevent us from losing
weight.
In the FLO Advantage
You can achieve lasting weight loss by working with your
biology through eating and exercising in ways
appropriate for each phase of your cycle. This female-
centered method teaches you how to compensate for the
rise in nutrient conservation in the luteal phase so you can
keep extra pounds off all month. All you have to do is
focus on eating specific foods that burn fuel more
efficiently—you’ll learn exactly which foods are ideal for
this phase in the next chapter. The British research team
mentioned earlier, based on their review of dozens of
existing studies, concluded that weight-management
programs should be based on tailoring diet consumption,
calorie intake, and physical activity level to each phase of
the menstrual cycle. Once again, science backs up your
body’s natural preference to sync with its cycle!
Biological System 4: Microbiome
Your gastrointestinal tract, vagina, and breasts are filled
with trillions of beneficial bacteria. When these friendly
microbes are balanced, they help keep your body
humming in good health and fend off disease. But when
they are imbalanced or bad bacteria sneak into the mix,
they are associated with conditions such as obesity,
rheumatoid arthritis, ADHD, and more. Emerging science
is increasingly finding differences between the sexes
when it comes to the human microbiome. For example, a
2014 study in Nature Communications found that
women’s and men’s gut flora responded differently to the
same diet. Other researchers found discrepancies between
women and men in the abundance of specific gut
bacteria. Researchers also noted differences between the
sexes in the proliferation of certain bacteria as weight
increased. No wonder your brother can lose weight on
diets tailored to his biological rhythms while you don’t
see the scale budge!
Your gut microbiome also has a unique connection to
your female brain. In fact, you have about 100 million
neurons in your gut, which is often referred to as the
“second brain.” Your gut is responsible for pumping out
more than 90 percent of the body’s supply of serotonin,
according to 2015 research in Cell. Although the
scientists didn’t note any differences between the sexes in
terms of the gut-serotonin connection, I think it’s logical
to assume that, with so much of the “happiness
neurotransmitter” emanating from your gut, your
microbiome health can affect your moods.
Did you know that your breasts also have a
microbiome? Or that this bacterial community could
modulate your risk for breast cancer? In a 2016 study
published in Applied and Environmental Microbiology,
researchers detected differences in the bacterial makeup
between women with breast cancer and those who were
cancer free. This finding raises many questions about the
breast microbiome’s role in the prevention or
development of breast cancer, and scientists are in
laboratories now trying to determine whether good
bacteria could be used as a possible treatment for the
disease.
How Your Cycle Affects Your Microbiome
Your microbiome is tightly linked to your hormones and
is considered by some to be an additional component of
the endocrine system. Science shows that estrogen
influences the gut in many ways: promoting the growth
and proliferation of good gut bacteria and providing a
protective barrier to prevent intestinal permeability, a
condition also known as leaky gut that allows contents
from the gut to seep out into the body. Leaky gut is
associated with bloating, cramps, gas, food sensitivities,
and other digestive issues. Estrogen receptors also
influence the composition of intestinal bacteria, according
to the Journal of Neuroimmunology. Considering this
research, you might be tempted to think more estrogen is
good for your gut and less is bad, but it isn’t that simple.
As with all your biological systems, balanced hormones
are the key to optimal function.
On the other side of the equation, your gut
microbiome plays a major role in the breakdown of
estrogen and is critical in keeping this key hormone
balanced. A certain set of gut bacteria—and more
specifically certain bacterial genes, called the
estrobolome—produce an essential enzyme that helps
metabolize estrogen. Your gut is thus part of the
elimination system that is vital to ushering hormones out
of the body. This process, when working efficiently, plays
an essential role in achieving hormonal harmony.
What Goes Wrong When We Ignore Our
Cyclical Nature
Considering the many ways the menstrual cycle impacts
the microbiome, it’s logical to assume imbalanced
hormones can have negative effects on gut, vaginal, and
breast health. Likewise, a poorly functioning internal
ecosystem can lead to a buildup of excess estrogen.
Estrogen dominance is tied to nearly every hormonal
imbalance symptom—infertility, PMS, low libido,
cramps, heavy bleeding, and PCOS.
In the FLO Advantage
Balancing hormone levels throughout the cycle can
promote a more vital microbiome. Better gut health can
translate into smoother digestion, easier weight loss,
improved neurotransmitter production, and enhanced
moods. Balanced vaginal bacteria can reduce the
occurrence of yeast infections, improve fertility, increase
the chances of a full-term pregnancy, and promote better
health for babies. As for the breast microbiome, we still
need more research—but I think it’s safe to say that
hormonal harmony is likely to promote better breast
health.
Biological System 5: Stress Response
As you saw in chapter 2, the modern-day quest for
perpetual harvest and nonstop production goes against
our chronobiology and natural female rhythms and
impacts our stress response. It’s no surprise that women
and men react differently to stress on both a mental and
physical level. According to the American Psychological
Association’s 2010 Stress in America report, women are
more likely to report having a great deal of stress and are
more inclined to say their stress levels are on the rise.
We’re also more likely to report the following emotional
and physical symptoms from stress:
Headache
Irritability
Fatigue
Lack of energy
Decreased motivation
Feeling like we could cry
Nervousness
Anxiety
Sadness or depression
Upset stomach
Muscle tension
Changes in appetite
Emerging research reveals underlying biological and
neurological mechanisms that may account for these
differences. To understand these mechanisms, let’s back
up and look at the biochemical underpinnings of the
human stress response. Acting as the air traffic controller
of this system is the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal
(HPA) axis. In general, when stressed, your hypothalamus
kicks into gear and orders your pituitary gland to start
pumping out adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH). The
flow of ACTH sends a signal to your adrenal glands to
open the floodgates on stress hormones, including
cortisol and adrenaline. But the HPA axis doesn’t always
work exactly the same way in women as in men.
The biological responses in men are characterized by
a “fight-or-flight” response, in which cortisol channels
glucose to the muscles and adrenaline boosts blood
pressure and heart rate. Most descriptions of this process
involve a look back at our cave-dwelling ancestors,
detailing how this response gave them a burst of energy
so they could outrun a charging buffalo or fight off
encroaching tribes. After they made it safely back to their
cave or defeated the other tribe, the danger passed and
their internal system returned to normal.
The story about the HPA axis response in women gets
a lot less ink (no surprise here!). Prior to 1995, most
research on the stress response had been done almost
exclusively on males, which is part of the reason why the
fight-or-flight response earned a place in our cultural
conditioning. Newer research, including a 2000 study in
Psychological Review, suggests that our biology doesn’t
always follow this same male pattern. Instead, women are
more inclined to have a “tend-and-befriend” response to
stress. During these times, we are more likely to tend to
young ones and befriend others for support as a way to
enhance the odds of survival—not only our own survival
but also that of our offspring. Just look at how women
rush to social media to support crowdfunding for disaster
relief—organizing donations to victims of hurricanes,
earthquakes, and even terror attacks. On a biological
level, our female sex hormones may dampen the
adrenaline rush that men typically feel when faced with
an outside threat or a stressful situation. In times of stress,
the female brain may also release the feel-good
neurochemical oxytocin, which is known as the bonding
hormone. Estrogen promotes the release of oxytocin,
while testosterone blocks it. Women and men don’t
secrete the same levels of these hormones, which activate
different areas of the brain.
How Your Cycle Affects Your Stress Response
During the week before your period, do you feel more
stressed? Is it harder for you to deal with that extra work
assignment? Do you wake up in the middle of the night
worrying about that fight you had with your sister?
You’re not alone, and no, it’s not all in your head. Science
backs up what you’ve known all along. Your biology is
programmed to heighten your stress response in the
second half of your cycle compared with the first half,
according to a 2017 study in the journal Physiology &
Behavior. Earlier research from a 2013 issue of
Psychoneuroendocrinology found that females release a
greater amount of the stress hormone cortisol during the
second half of the cycle compared with the first half. It’s
likely this heightened response is nature’s way of helping
you protect a fertilized egg in the event you’re pregnant.
What Goes Wrong When We Ignore Our
Cyclical Nature
Stress can do a real number on your brain. According to a
2015 paper in the Journal of Endocrinology, stress hits
the neural circuitry responsible for cognitive function,
decision-making, and moods, which in turn can alter
other biological systems, including the nervous system,
immune system, and metabolism. A 2011 review in
Industrial Psychiatry Journal found that the stress
response sparks activity in different regions in women
(the limbic system) and in men (a region of the prefrontal
cortex). A receptor in the brain’s hypothalamus, which is
involved in appetite and satiety, also reacts differently in
women and men when stress hits. Appetite drops in
women but not men, which could be a reason women
tend to be more prone to eating disorders, according to
2016 research in Cell Metabolism.
Too much stress can also disrupt your sex life and
fertility. The chemicals released during times of stress
interfere with your body’s production of estrogen,
progesterone, luteinizing hormone, FSH, and prolactin.
Too much stress can really throw off your hormone
levels, leading to irregular periods, fertility problems, and
a lukewarm libido. A 2013 study in the Journal of Sexual
Medicine revealed that the impact of chronic stress goes
deeper than decreasing the desire to get frisky in the
bedroom. Chronic stress hits us on a physiological level
too. In fact, women with high levels of chronic stress
have lower levels of genital sexual arousal.
Exposure to chronic stress can deplete your body’s
resources, make you feel tired all the time, and lead to
burnout. You might think chronic stress will eventually
cause adrenal fatigue, but traditional physicians don’t
recognize this as a legitimate ailment. Make no mistake,
though—the symptoms are very real. If you ask your
doctor to check you for adrenal fatigue, you might get the
“You’re fine—it’s all in your head” speech. Some
standouts in the health field, such as Dr. Aviva Romm,
however, suggest adrenal fatigue could actually be
something called allostatic load. Researchers say
allostatic load is a biomarker measure of the “wear and
tear” on the body and brain that affects overall health. In
2017, a paper in PLOS ONE concluded that the higher
your allostatic load, the poorer your health.
The stress response–hormonal cycle is a two-way
street. Just as your hormonal cycle influences your stress
response, your period can be disrupted when your stress
response gets out of control. Here are five ways a rise in
cortisol can affect your monthly cycle.
It interferes with insulin: Increases in cortisol
levels disrupt insulin’s ability to control blood sugar
levels. In turn, this disruption messes with ovulation
and menstruation.
It decreases progesterone: Cortisol gets in the way
of progesterone production, which can disrupt your
cycle. When your body is stressed, it uses
progesterone to crank out more cortisol rather than
what it is intended to do. If you’re trying to
conceive, be aware that insufficient progesterone
levels can decrease your chances of getting pregnant
and make it more difficult to sustain a pregnancy
full-term.
It delays ovulation: If stress hits when you’re
nearing the ovulatory phase, increased levels of
cortisol can delay or even prevent an egg from being
released into the uterus. From a biological
standpoint, you can understand why your body
wouldn’t want to promote pregnancy during a period
of heavy stress. This is your body’s way of
conserving your energy to handle the stress, which it
sees as an immediate threat. Once that threat is gone,
your body can set the stage for conception to take
place.
It changes the length and timing of your period:
Stress that occurs after the ovulatory phase can
cause a hormonal imbalance that may lead to a
number of changes in your period. These may
include spotting, an early arrival for your next
period, a bleed that’s thicker or more watery than
usual, or a change in color or duration. This
imbalance can also set you up for symptoms like
cramps, even if you don’t usually experience painful
periods. A 2004 study in Women’s Health Issues
determined that women with high stress levels have
a shorter cycle interval and shorter duration of
bleeding compared with women who don’t have
increased stress levels. Other studies show that
common stressors like going to college can trigger
longer cycles, according to research in the American
Journal of Epidemiology.
Your period can go MIA: After a particularly
stressful time, you may start bleeding later than
usual. But did you know that a late period might not
be a real period? If you skipped ovulation, your
hormones didn’t go through the usual dance to cause
menstruation. In this case, it’s more like a
breakthrough bleed to shed any endometrial lining
that built up in the uterus. If you didn’t ovulate, it’s
not a physiological period. However, your uterus
will still shed any lining that had been built up. Your
late period isn’t just a nuisance you can ignore; it’s
your body’s way of telling you it’s under constant or
chronic levels of stress and unable to operate
optimally. In order to perform all the countless
functions necessary to keep you alive, your body
shuts down ovulation in an effort to conserve
resources and energy. If you’re not trying to
conceive, maybe you think this lack of ovulation is
no big deal. But think again: when your body
doesn’t ovulate, the stage is set for more hormonal
symptoms and period problems—everything from
PMS, to acne, to cramps. A late period due to excess
stress is more than just an inconvenience—it’s a
precursor to a long list of other serious health issues.
In the FLO Advantage
You don’t have to let stress dominate the second half of
your cycle or develop into a chronic condition. You can
take control of stress instead of letting it control you. In
the following section of this book, you’ll see how the
Cycle Syncing Method™ helps you tame stress in the
luteal phase, how honoring your second clock puts the
brakes on chronic stress, and how biohacking like a
woman keeps cortisol from getting out of control.
The Feminist Take: Different and Equal
When you’re struck with the scientific evidence of all these
fundamental biological differences between women and men
and how they affect you in so many ways, it can feel very
validating. You may feel a little tinge of concern, however,
because we certainly have been fighting for decades to prove
we’re all equal as human beings. Of course, we’re equal, and
deserve to be treated equally at the workplace, in the political
realm, and in society at large. Nothing about our distinctive
female biology prevents us from standing on an equal footing
with men or having access to the same opportunities. But from
a health standpoint, now we deserve even more. Medicine is
already moving toward a bio-individual treatment approach.
The concept of one-size-fits-all treatments is becoming a thing
of the past. For example, cancer treatments are increasingly
targeted to a person’s genetic expression and individual form
of the disease. What needs to happen next is the health care
arena finally adding our female biology and fluctuating
hormonal cycle into the equation when it comes to our health
care and wellness.
It also might seem that men and women have less free will
than thought if our hormones govern so much of our
experience. The reality is that you enhance your ability to
express yourself by working with these biological rhythms,
and the inverse is also true: your experience can become
increasingly negatively limited by not supporting your
biological rhythms. This is the reality for both men and
women. When I first experienced this powerful shift in
understanding, I found it to be incredibly liberating. Finally, I
could let go of this notion that I needed to somehow force
myself to be the same every day, which got twisted into an
idea that I needed to be perfect. In working with many women
over the years, I know that this feeling of relief is a common
reaction. Learning about my female biochemistry gave me
more compassion for myself, and I developed a greater
understanding and love for the way my female body, brain,
and biological systems operate. And one thing became
absolutely clear: once you accept your biochemical nature and
how much it influences your life, you’re left with a simple
choice—are you going to fight your nature, or are you going to
work with it? Your day-to-day lifestyle and self-care choices
either work against your cyclical nature and lead to symptoms,
or they support it and enhance cognitive skills, rev up your
energy, and boost your moods. It’s a no-brainer.
IN THE FLO MANIFESTO
I acknowledge my cycle has four distinct hormonal
patterns.
Each of these phases requires different nourishment
and self-care.
Supporting each phase is the key to optimizing my
health.
Syncing with each phase allows me to tap into
creativity to optimize work, motherhood, and
relationships on my own terms.
Living according to my biological rhythmic timing
restores my sovereignty and makes me more free.
Now that you understand your beautiful biological reality, it’s
time to discover the phase-specific foods, fitness routines, and
energy-management strategies that will help you biohack your
nutrition, workouts, and calendar. The next section of this
book will unveil the simple steps to begin syncing with your
cycle, so you can start optimizing your health and life now!
Part 2
Getting Your Body in the FLO
And I said to my body, softly, “I want to be your friend.” It
took a long breath and replied, “I have been waiting my whole
life for this!”
—NAYYIRAH WAHEED
Chapter 4
Never Diet Again
When we give up dieting, we take back something we
were often too young to know we had given away: our
own voice. Our ability to make decisions about what
to eat and when. Our belief in ourselves. Our right to
decide what goes into our mouths. . . .
Your body is reliable. . . . If you listen, it will speak.
—GENEEN ROTH
A
re you ready to become a cyclical biohacker? Think of
biohacking as an ongoing experiment in which you track
biomarkers so you can modify your diet, fitness routines, and
lifestyle habits to find the best ways to optimize your hormonal
health, biological systems, and creativity. Long before this trendy
term became part of the everyday lexicon, I was desperately trying
to biohack my way to better health by trying to balance my
hormones and heal my PCOS symptoms. I spent thousands of
dollars on products that promised to clear up acne, and I went on
every diet under the sun. A practitioner I worked with had me
follow a morning regimen that involved drinking carrot juice with
powdered greens added—the juice looked like pond scum—and
after a few months it turned my skin orange! The juice didn’t help
my acne, and I didn’t lose weight on any of those diets. It was so
frustrating, and I felt like a failure. I couldn’t understand why
nothing was working for me. I wish I had known then what I
know now. All those remedies I was trying were not factoring in
my monthly hormonal patterns. As you saw in the previous
section, women have long been viewed as diminutive versions of
our male counterparts. Aside from our anatomical parts and sex
hormones, it’s been largely assumed that our bodies operate and
respond similarly. This has led to the prevailing belief that what’s
good for the gander is good for the goose. Wrong! As my early
biohacking experiments showed, many “surefire solutions” simply
didn’t work for me because they were designed with men and their
24-hour clock in mind. Those solutions are especially unhelpful
for any woman trying to lose weight.
Nothing clicked until I realized that even though we have
proved we are capable of doing anything men can do and more,
we are not the same biochemical creatures as men. And in
addition, because of our hormonal fluctuations, we are not even
the same creatures from day to day ourselves. It was crazy to think
I should be doing the same self-care routine every day or
following biohacking strategies created with men in mind. The
answer lay in finding tools that worked with my female
biochemistry, my body’s cyclical rhythm, my feminine biological
systems, and the hormonal changes taking place over my 28-day
clock. But what are these tools?
Many things in the current biohacking sphere—think
intermittent fasting and ketogenic diets, to name just a couple—
fall short for women. Why? These biohacks are all geared to the
24-hour clock and helping men enhance their energy,
concentration, and stamina day in and day out. Women, with our
second 28-day clock, need something different and less extreme.
The key for us to optimize our system and access its gifts is to
simply support and nurture our natural cyclical rhythms. With
some simple tweaks, you can biohack your way to a symptom-free
period, enhanced productivity, better overall health, happier
moods, more creativity, and more loving relationships—and you
can achieve these results in a very short amount of time. In this
part of the book, rather than thinking about biohacking the way
men do—using outside sources to boost energy within a 24-hour
period—we’re going to adopt a female-centered concept of
biohacking, in which you’re supporting your natural inner energy
and unlocking your biological gifts by replenishing your
micronutrient levels and syncing your diet, exercise, and lifestyle
with your cyclical nature.
This part of the book will show you step by step how to use
the Cycle Syncing Method™. This chapter shows you how to use
food to support your hormones and biological systems during each
phase of your menstrual cycle. Chapter 5 reveals the secrets to
exercising in rhythm with your body so you can get better results
with less sweat. Chapter 6 introduces you to the right-timing
planning tools that will help you achieve more with less effort.
These are the foundations of the Cycle Syncing Membership. And
I’ll also help you find simple ways to get started syncing with
your cycle, even if your hormones are unbalanced or you have
irregular or missing periods. Adopting a cyclical way of living is
the most revolutionary and empowering shift you can make to
overcome the miseducation and cultural conditioning you have
faced throughout your life. It is the most effective way to nourish
your two biological clocks and is the gateway to living in tune
with your body’s inner rhythm so you can unleash your creativity,
reclaim your power, and build momentum in your life.
Think of the Cycle Syncing Method™ as the “undiet” that puts
you in touch with the natural biofeedback system your brain and
body are inherently equipped to provide. At the center of the
Cycle Syncing Method™ is something no other wellness, diet, or
exercise program you’ve tried has: you! This is a whole new
mindset, in which you take the driver’s seat. Getting healthy and
feeling good by partnering with your body goes against what
you’ve been taught—to control your body because it’s
unpredictable and unreliable. The cyclical self-care practice
outlined in this part of the book heals your relationship with your
body. You have to live inside your female body—to care for, feed,
rest, move, and love it.
The only way to get the results you want is to get in tune with
your biology. Any time you don’t feel good, you need to stop,
examine what’s going on, and start troubleshooting. This is the
guiding principle behind female biohacking—to be in a deep and
continuous observation-and-response mode about your own body,
or what I like to call active listening and compassionate response.
Remember, your body is the container for the experiment; you are
the citizen scientist interpreting the results of those experiments.
Your energy levels, performance at work, moods, and hormonal
symptoms are the experiment’s results that will guide you through
the process. In a short amount of time, it will become second
nature for you to understand what’s happening in your body and
how to support it in the best possible way. After all, no one can
know your body as well as you do.
Special note: If you’ve been diagnosed with a hormonal
condition, such as PCOS, endometriosis, amenorrhea, or fibroids,
be aware that you need to do some foundational work before you
start syncing with your cycle. See the Biohacking Tool Kit section
for a step-by-step process to help you take the path from problem
periods to syncing with your cycle.
The Food-Hormone Connection
In this chapter, I’ll map out the first part of the Cycle Syncing
Method™ by exploring food—the ultimate medicine for your
body, brain, and hormones. Most of my clients begin their cyclical
lifestyle journey with food. And even if you change only one food
per phase or focus only on adopting the foods recommended for a
single phase, you can start to see some big payoffs. For example,
look at Allie. At twenty-six, she quit the pill and her periods went
MIA. As an organic chef, she was drawn to the idea of a food-
focused approach to balancing her hormones. In general, she was
already eating many of the healthful foods I recommend, but she
used caffeine, chocolate, and sweets whenever she needed an
energy boost, even though she hated the crash that usually
followed. When she decided to give cycle-based eating a try, she
swapped out those three foods for more nutrient-dense options that
provide lasting energy rather than a quick fix, and started tailoring
her meals to the phases of her cycle. With these minor changes, it
took only about two months for her period to return to a regular
28-day cycle, and she noticed less bloating and less breast
tenderness during her luteal phase. And the discomfort she used to
feel in her lower abdomen? She says it now feels more like “a
buzzing, singing sensation rather than cramps”—all from
changing a few things in her diet. These are the kind of results you
can see when you eat for your cycle. It’s possible because what
you eat provides the foundation your body needs to keep your
hormones balanced. Eating the wrong foods or eliminating entire
categories of macronutrients from your diet can rob your system
of the raw materials it needs to produce healthy hormones, which
play a critical role in our physical health, cognitive function,
moods, and longevity.
Food has profound effects on your menstrual cycle and
fertility, but when we have issues with our hormones, we’re often
told there’s nothing we can do about it other than take synthetic
birth control, have surgery, or invest in expensive fertility
treatments. Nobody tells us the foods we’re consuming could be
contributing to the problem or that we can fix our symptoms
simply by changing our eating habits. But science proves it’s
possible. Want proof? Here are just a few examples of the way
food influences our hormonal health.
Menarche: Several studies have clearly linked consumption
of certain dietary items—including meat, caffeinated drinks,
sugar-sweetened sodas, and beverages—with artificial sweeteners
to an earlier age of menarche, the onset of your first period. In one
study in a 2015 issue of Human Reproduction, researchers
followed 5,583 girls for five years to determine the effects on age
of menarche of drinking sugar-sweetened beverages—
uncarbonated fruit juice, sodas, and iced tea—and guess what?
Girls who gulped more than 1.5 servings of sugary drinks per day
started their periods an average of 2.7 months earlier than those
who drank less.
The age when you get your first period is important: it is one
of the first signs of your hormonal well-being, and early menarche
has been associated with an increased risk of cardiovascular
disease, diabetes, obesity, and breast cancer.
PMS: The foods you eat have also been linked to
premenstrual symptoms. In the late luteal phase just before your
period arrives, falling estrogen levels can cause a drop in serotonin
levels, which can ratchet up your cravings for simple carbs. But
science shows us these foods are likely to exacerbate your PMS
symptoms. For example, gobbling a bag of salty pretzels to satisfy
your PMS cravings makes your body retain water to counteract all
the additional sodium swimming in your bloodstream and ends up
bumping up the bloat factor. Giving in to your cravings for
cookies, pastries, or candy can feel like a quick fix for a mood
boost because the body uses carbs to produce serotonin, but the
quick fix is followed by a sharp decline in blood sugar levels and
energy. This puts you on a veritable blood sugar roller-coaster ride
that can increase PMS symptoms of moodiness, irritability, and
nervousness, and crank up those cravings. On the flip side, certain
foods can help calm your PMS symptoms. For example, a 2005
study in the Archives of Internal Medicine found that women
whose diets included foods with higher amounts of calcium and
vitamin D had less of a risk for PMS than women who got less of
these micronutrients from their foods.
Fertility: If you’re one of the more than six million women
ages fifteen to forty-four who have difficulty getting or staying
pregnant, it’s important to look at your diet along with other
potential causes. Researchers at the Harvard School of Public
Health followed 17,544 married women for eight years as they
attempted to become or succeeded in becoming pregnant. In their
2007 study published in Obstetrics & Gynecology, these
researchers found that women who adhered to a “fertility diet,”
along with engaging in physical activity and keeping their weight
under control, experienced 69 percent less of a risk of infertility
due to ovulatory problems. According to the study, ovulatory
problems make up 18 to 30 percent of infertility cases. The
fertility diet included the following eating habits:
Higher consumption of monounsaturated fats (olive oil,
avocados, pumpkin seeds) rather than trans fats
(margarine, crackers, doughnuts)
Higher consumption of low-glycemic carbohydrates (beans,
lentils, broccoli, spinach)
Consuming more protein from plants than from animal
sources
Eating more iron (spinach, shellfish, legumes)
Eating more fiber (chickpeas, artichokes, Brussels sprouts)
Consuming more high-fat dairy products compared with low-
fat dairy—this one surprised the researchers (if you’re going
to consume dairy, make sure it is sheep, goat, buffalo, or
camel dairy, which contains A2 proteins, as opposed to A1
proteins that have been associated with leaky gut)
Taking more multivitamins
Having a lower body mass index (BMI)
Engaging in longer periods of physical activity each day
Perimenopause and menopause: Food impacts your
hormonal cycle on the other end of the menstrual spectrum as
well. The number one complaint I hear from most of the women I
see who are entering the perimenopause zone is hot flashes. Most
women associate hot flashes with postmenopause, but they can
start years or even a decade or more before your periods stop. In
fact, I’ve heard from several younger women that they get hot
flashes right before their monthly bleed begins. This timing makes
sense because your body experiences its biggest dip in estrogen
right before the lining sheds, which means you can have a
temperature change that bumps up the heat factor. Food can come
to your rescue! A 2015 review of existing research in Climacteric
found that phytoestrogens—plant-derived compounds that mimic
natural estrogen—significantly reduce the frequency of hot
flashes. Adding phytoestrogens—found in tempeh, miso, and
flaxseeds—to your meals during the right phase of your cycle is
the key to keeping hot flashes in check. We’ll learn more about
this topic soon.
All of this research validates what I have been witnessing
firsthand throughout my career—your diet can have a real impact
on your hormonal function. As more research continues to support
the real-life results I’ve already seen in my clients, the concept of
using food rather than synthetic hormones to balance your
hormones will become more commonplace. It’s exciting to
envision a day when nutrition therapy, like the kind we offer at
FLO Living and that you’re learning about in this chapter, will be
a routine complement to your annual gynecology appointment.
Most important, this research unravels the toxic period mythology
that we are victims to our hormones. You do not have to suffer
from hormonal imbalance. You can eat your way to a better period
for longer in your life. Syncing with your cycle is the way to do it.
Eating for Each Phase of Your Cycle
Your body isn’t the same every day, and your diet shouldn’t be
either! Yes, eating at regular intervals to honor your 24-hour clock
is important, but as your ovaries and uterus engage in distinct
functions each week of your cycle, your micronutrient needs vary.
You need to eat foods that support each phase of your cycle. These
phases aren’t separate siloes; your cycle flows from one phase to
the next, and each one influences the others. Eating the right foods
in one phase offers immediate rewards, but that’s not all. Think of
it as the gift that keeps on giving. Eating the right foods in that
phase also helps lay the foundation to optimize your biology for
the next phase and even to provide benefits in the other phases
that follow. Consuming phase-specific foods not only eliminates
period problems, but also gives your biology the boost it needs to
support your cyclical hormones and become the best version of
yourself by maintaining and increasing the energy you have
available to do what you want. This information is the opposite of
what we’ve been taught, that these hormones hinder us and we
need to shut them down—not true!
The concept of eating in sync with your cycle is simple. Each
phase of your menstrual cycle correlates to a different set of
proteins, grains, vegetables, fruits, and other foods that support the
hormonal changes your body is experiencing. Certain foods are
included in specific phases based on their ability to metabolize
estrogen, support progesterone production, or stabilize blood sugar
levels. Throughout the month, you’ll be eating a wide variety of
nutritious foods, and you’ll have a lot of flexibility when it comes
to meal planning. The Cycle Syncing Method™ is intended to be
convenient, and it helps you save money, too. Forget about diet
plans that suggest you eat half a grapefruit for just one meal, on
one day of the week. I always wondered, what the heck am I
supposed to do with the other half of that grapefruit? Perhaps best
of all, this way of eating is radically freeing. You won’t be
counting calories, because this method is not about how much you
eat but about eating the right foods at the right times. Once you
get the hang of it, this way of eating becomes intuitive. You’ll be
able to listen to your body to know what it needs, and you’ll
naturally crave healthy foods instead of foods that sabotage your
systems. Let’s look at how to eat your way to hormonal health in
each phase of your cycle.
Origins of the Food Chart
Based on my research into Chinese medicine and functional
nutrition, which uses micronutrients, foods, and herbs to support
and nourish the body, and its organs—including the endocrine
glands and hormones—I was able to create this cyclical eating
program. In this ancient system, organ systems have a dominant
season during which they are more active and most receptive to
support. As I was doing a deep dive into the four phases of the
hormonal cycle, I saw the parallels between these seasonal foods
and the four “seasons” in our monthly cycle. The foods
recommended on this program represent the intersection of the
Chinese medicine theory of using foods to support bodily organs
and the seasonality of the cycle to support your hormone levels
throughout the entire month.
For example, the foods in the follicular phase are reflective of
our inner spring. These foods tend to be lighter, which fits with
this phase when metabolism is naturally a bit slower. Follicular
foods also have a bit of astringency, making them particularly
good for liver function and detoxification. In the ovulatory phase,
which is our inner summer, the foods help our bodies balance out
the spike in estrogen and support the heart. In the luteal phase,
which corresponds to our inner fall, the fiber-rich foods support
the large intestine to increase transit time, which is critical during
the luteal phase, when progesterone levels increase and slow
digestion. The nutrient-dense foods here also correspond to the
fact that your body’s metabolism naturally speeds up in this phase.
During menstruation, which reflects our inner winter, it’s
important to stock up on micronutrients that build up the blood,
because you are losing blood as you shed the lining of your uterus.
These foods also support the kidneys and help balance hormones
as their levels drop during your monthly bleed.
Rotating foods based on the inner seasons of the body, or the
hormonal phases, makes a lot of sense. The biochemistry of how
our hormones actually work requires certain foods on many
different levels—from eating foods that help support the
production of our hormones, eating foods that help support their
elimination, eating foods that help us navigate the changes in our
metabolism, eating foods that help us stabilize our blood sugar,
and eating foods that replenish our micronutrients. It just makes so
much sense that you would not want to eat the same way, day in
and day out.
Follicular
Fresh, vibrant, light foods make you feel more energized during
this phase, when all hormone levels are beginning to rise. This
week you’ll want to focus on those phytoestrogens that I
mentioned earlier—plant-based compounds that mimic the body’s
natural estrogen. You wouldn’t want to eat them when you already
have high levels, but during this period of lower estrogen, they can
be balancing and beneficial. Think pressed salads (kimchi and
sauerkraut): plenty of veggies (string beans, zucchini, carrots);
lean proteins (chicken, trout); sprouted beans and seeds; and
nutrient-dense, energy-sustaining grains like oats. Emerging
research suggests that probiotic supplementation—and, I would
argue, probiotic-rich foods like those you’re eating during this
phase—help balance the estrobolome. In addition, the foods you
consume in the follicular phase set the stage for ovulation. By
eating fermented foods packed with beneficial bacteria, you’re
priming the microbiome and estrobolome to be ready when
ovulation occurs.
Ovulatory
Thanks to surging estrogen, your energy levels should be high,
and your moods should be stable during the ovulatory phase of
your cycle. However, without the right dietary support, that surge
may go too far and make you vulnerable to experiencing the
symptoms of excess levels of estrogen, such as acne. According to
traditional Chinese medicine, this is a hot phase of the cycle
because of the temperature change from ovulation, so you can
sustain the most raw foods during this phase. Fill up on veggies
(red bell pepper, spinach, tomato, leafy greens) and fruit
(raspberries, strawberries) for their cooling effect and fiber.
These foods also provide high levels of glutathione, a powerful
antioxidant that will help your liver metabolize excess estrogen
from your body more efficiently. Remember, your metabolism is
slower in the first half of your cycle, so you don’t need as many
calories and will feel good with lighter meals. You don’t need as
many carbohydrates, so you can feel satisfied with lighter grains,
such as quinoa and corn. Ovulatory foods promote antioxidative
well-being and provide vascular support for your ovaries so your
body can create the healthiest egg possible. These foods will also
ward off estrogen-driven symptoms, such as acne and bloating. By
eating a lot of fiber-rich foods in this phase, you’re also supporting
your large intestine to increase transit time and help flush the
estrogen that the liver is working hard to metabolize.
Luteal
In the luteal phase, your body needs more calories—remember, as
you saw in the previous chapter, the American Journal of Clinical
Nutrition found that your metabolism naturally speeds up during
this phase—along with B vitamins to pump up the production of
progesterone and to stabilize blood sugar levels. Not following
these guidelines can trigger sugar cravings. To curb cravings, you
need to proactively eat slow-burning carbohydrates (like brown
rice or sweet potato) throughout the day, and shift your diet to
emphasize foods rich in B vitamins, calcium, magnesium, and
fiber. Eat cooked leafy greens such as collards, mustard greens,
and watercress, which are high in calcium and magnesium to
reduce fluid retention, something that affects many women in this
phase. Consuming high-fiber foods like chickpeas, pears, apples,
and walnuts will help your liver and large intestine flush out
estrogen more effectively, reducing the effects of estrogen
dominance. In the second half of the luteal phase, when estrogen
levels dip, boost your intake of healthy, natural sugars, such as
roasted or baked root veggies. Be sure to keep filling up on
complex carbohydrates, such as millet, to stabilize serotonin and
dopamine levels and help prevent mood swings. Eating more
nutrient-dense foods that provide more calories in the luteal phase
will help prevent any energy dips during your period. The foods
recommended for this phase offer another unexpected bonus—
better bowel movements! The rise in progesterone during the
second half of the cycle slows transit time and can lead to
constipation.
Menstrual
Your hormone levels are at their lowest levels during
menstruation, but you can compensate by increasing your intake
of protein and healthy fats. Doing so will keep your energy and
moods stable while your brain adjusts to the downshift in
hormones. Protein is rich in amino acids, which are involved in
hormone synthesis. In addition, eating these foods now can help
set you up for a healthier ovulatory phase during your next cycle.
The reason is that dietary fat intake has been linked to increases in
progesterone and testosterone, and a reduced risk for ovulatory
problems, according to 2016 research in the American Journal of
Clinical Nutrition. And a 2013 trial on animals in the European
Journal of Experimental Biology found that dietary fats and fatty
acids increased the release of estrogen and progesterone and
improved egg and embryo quality. When your body is involved in
the intense process of menstruation—shedding the built-up lining
of the uterus—it’s especially important to turn your focus to
nutrient-dense foods, such as red meat, kidney beans, and
buckwheat. According to traditional Chinese medicine, this is the
coldest part of the cycle, so warming foods are ideal during this
phase. Protein, fats, veggies, and fruits with a low-glycemic index
—think blueberries and blackberries—keep your blood sugar
steady while adding fiber and antioxidants. Seafood, kelp, and
nori can help re-mineralize your body with iron and zinc, which
you lose during menstruation. These foods are deeply restorative
to the blood and kidneys and are ideal while you’re bleeding. If
you find that you have looser bowel movements when your period
begins, it’s due to the absence of progesterone to slow down
transit time in the bowel and the introduction of prostaglandins to
stimulate the uterus. Modulating your food cyclically will also
help alleviate the weird period poop experience.
The Cycle Syncing Method™: Food FLO
Follicular Ovulatory Luteal Menstrual
Phase Phase Phase Phase
Grains Barley Amaranth Brown rice Buckwheat
Oat Corn Millet (kasha)
Rye Quinoa Wild rice
Wheat
Vegetables Artichoke Asparagus Cabbage Beets
Broccoli Bell Cauliflower Burdock
pepper,
Carrot Celery Dulse
red
Lettuce: Collard Hijiki
Brussels
Bibb,
sprouts Cucumber Kale
Boston,
romaine Chard Daikon Kelp
Parsley Chicory Garlic Kombu
Pea: green Chive Ginger Mushrooms:
button,
Rhubarb Dandelion Leek
Shiitake
String bean Eggplant Mustard
Wakame
greens
Zucchini Endive
Water chestnut
Onion
Escarole
Parsnip
Okra
Pumpkin
Scallion
Radish
Spinach
Squash
Tomato
Sweet potato
Watercress
Fruit Avocado Apricot Apple Blackberry
Grapefruit Cantaloupe Date Blueberry
Lemon Coconut Peach Concord grape
Lime Fig Pear Watermelon
Orange Guava Raisin
Plum Persimmon
Pomegranate Raspberry
Sour cherry Strawberry
Legumes Black-eyed Red lentil Chickpea Adzuki bean
pea
Great Black soybean
Green lentil northern
Black turtle
bean
Lima bean bean
Navy bean
Mung bean Kidney bean
Split pea
Nuts & Brazil Almond Hickory Chestnut
Brazil
Cashew Flaxseeds Pine nut Sesame seeds
Flaxseeds Pecan Sesame Sunflower
seeds seeds
Lychee Pistachio
Sunflower
Pumpkin Pumpkin
seeds
seeds seeds
Walnut
Meat Chicken Lamb Beef Duck
Eggs Turkey Pork
Seafood Fresh-water Salmon Cod Catfish
clam
Shrimp Flounder Clam
Soft-shell
Tuna Halibut Crab
crab
Lobster
Trout
Mussel
Octopus
Oyster
Sardine
Scallop
Squid
Other Nut butter Alcohol, Mint Bancha tea
Olives moderate Peppermint Decaf coffee
Pickles Chocolate Spirulina Miso
Sauerkraut Coffee Salt
Vinegar Ketchup Tamari
Turmeric
Note: You can dive deeper on the MyFLO app (www.MyFLOtracker.com) and at
www.cyclesyncingmembership.com/bonus.
How Cyclical Eating Supports Your Five Biological
Systems
The beauty of a cyclical “diet” is that eating phase-specific
foods that support your hormones also helps you eliminate
PMS, protect fertility, achieve and maintain a healthy weight,
have clearer skin, experience easier periods, improve moods,
and boost energy. Think of cyclical eating as priming your
physical body, brain, and mental fortitude so you can be your
most productive, creative, and happy self. Here’s the science
behind what food does for each of your biological systems:
Biological System 1: Brain
Estrogen in the brain has profound effects on memory,
learning, and moods. As you’ve seen, during the ovulatory
phase, high estrogen levels enhance your verbal and social
skills. You may wonder, if higher levels of estrogen boost
these beneficial traits, why would you ever want to reduce
estrogen levels? Well, with hormones, it is possible to have
too much of a good thing. It’s a Goldilocks situation: Too
much estrogen can make you anxious and foggy. Too little
can leave you feeling irritable. You need just the right
amount to keep you in the sweet spot. What you eat can
impact where you fall on the hormonal spectrum—too much,
too little, or just right. For example, that kale smoothie you
drink because you think it’s good for you? It is great for you
during the ovulatory phase, when your estrogen levels are
high, but it works against you during the menstrual phase,
when estrogen levels dip. Your diet also affects the
production of those mood-inducing neurotransmitters, such
as serotonin. When serotonin levels naturally dip during the
luteal phase, you may be tempted to go for a quick fix like
chocolate chip cookies, a handful of caramel popcorn, or a
red velvet cupcake. But research in the Indian Journal of
Psychiatry and Public Health Nutrition found that poor food
choices are linked to mood disorders, such as depression, and
may be due in part to lower levels of serotonin. If you don’t
eat in a cyclical fashion, your food choices could mess with
your neurotransmitter levels, affecting your thinking,
impulsiveness, and moods, especially during the second half
of your cycle. This effect helps explain why so many of us
believe the myth that we’re destined to feel good in the first
half of our cycle and lousy in the second half. As you saw in
chapter 3, this myth just isn’t true. Excess estrogen makes
you feel anxious when it surges in the ovulatory phase; you
then can feel depressed when estrogen dips in the luteal
phase. You can balance these highs and lows just by being
smart about your food choices.
The cyclical advantage: Syncing your food with your
cycle helps optimize your brain chemistry. In the follicular
phase, you’ll be eating foods that promote estrogen
metabolism to prevent a buildup of the hormone in the gut,
which plays such an important role in serotonin production.
When estrogen peaks in the ovulatory phase, you’ll be
focusing on consuming raw vegetables to flush the hormone
from your body and calm anxiety. During the luteal phase,
you’ll be eating slow-burning, complex carbohydrates (aka
“mood foods”) that stabilize blood sugar levels and help
boost the feel-good neurotransmitter serotonin, which acts as
a natural appetite suppressant and mood stabilizer. One of the
main priorities of the endocrine system is to safeguard the
transport of glucose to the brain, so if you want to have a
fighting chance at having healthy moods, you’ve got to make
sure your brain is getting an adequate supply of glucose from
complex carbohydrates.
Biological System 2: Immune System
Food plays a vital role in your immune system’s ability to
keep you healthy. Research shows that your immune system
operates at full throttle during the first half of your cycle,
helping you ward off viruses, then downshifts during the
second half of your cycle. If you aren’t compensating for
these shifts by eating in sync with your cycle, you could be
more susceptible to the cold that’s going around the office.
According to a 2002 study in the European Journal of
Clinical Nutrition, deficiencies in micronutrients—especially
zinc; selenium; iron; copper; and vitamins A, C, E, B , and
6
folic acid—can reduce immunity.
The cyclical advantage: The nutrient-dense foods you’ll
be eating with this cyclical program provide the
micronutrients you need to boost your immune system. These
are especially critical during the late luteal phase, when your
immune system needs the most support. During this time,
you’ll be bypassing raw foods—goodbye, salads—in favor of
more cooked fare like soups and steamed broccoli, because
the cooking process makes micronutrients more bioavailable
and easier to absorb. Bonus: If you suffer from an
autoimmune disorder, eating in tune with your cycle balances
estrogen, which may help ease symptoms.
Biological System 3: Metabolism
As you saw in chapter 3, your ability to burn calories
depends on the phase of your cycle. In the first half of your
cycle, when estrogen levels are increasing, your appetite
decreases and your metabolism slows. During the second half
of your cycle, when estrogen drops and progesterone rises,
your body naturally burns 8 to 16 percent more calories, but
this change comes with an increase in appetite. Restriction
diets, crash diets, and diets that force you to eliminate major
food groups—especially carbohydrates and fats—prevent
your body from producing the hormones it needs to keep
your metabolism humming along and burning effectively.
Those restrictive diets actually work against your fat-burning
system.
The cyclical advantage: To fire up your body’s fat-
burning ability, you need to feed it the right kinds of foods
and the optimal amounts of food during the right phases.
During the first half of your cycle, rising estrogen curbs your
appetite and stabilizes your blood sugar levels, so you can eat
lighter—think salads and smoothies—and focus on slowcarb
meals like chicken with spinach and lentils. In the second
half of your cycle, however, you have to eat enough to meet
your additional caloric needs. Trying to starve yourself
during this phase will backfire; your body will rev up its fat-
storing mechanisms. This is the time you want to reach for
richer proteins and lots of slow-burning carbohydrates like
beans, grains, and root vegetables.
Biological System 4: Microbiome
When you don’t eat in sync with your cycle, you may alter
the balance of your microbiome, which can lead to a host of
issues, including estrogen dominance, period problems,
digestive issues, increased susceptibility to illnesses, fuzzy
thinking, anxiety and depression, and more.
The cyclical advantage: The fermented foods
recommended for the follicular phase help seed your
microbiome with good-for-you bacteria. Balancing your
blood sugar by shifting away from refined sugars and simple
carbohydrates, and by opting for complex carbohydrates
(oats, barley) and low-glycemic index fruits (grapefruit and
plums) and veggies (carrots and green peas), protects you
from developing harmful gut bacteria and keeps your
microbiome working for you rather than against you.
Keeping your microbiome balanced leads to better hormonal
health and a reduced risk of estrogen dominance, helping you
eliminate PMS problems and enjoy clearer thinking, better
moods, and sustained energy. And because you’re cycling
foods in and out of your meals from week to week and
transitioning from raw foods during the ovulatory phase to
cooked foods during menstruation, your gut is never
overexposed to any particular food that may be causing an
inflammatory response. It’s as if you’re rotating crops—and
it is one of the keys to better gut health.
Biological System 5: Stress Response
Scientific studies have concluded that certain foods and
nutrients are key to stress management. In particular,
complex carbohydrates, proteins, vitamin C, vitamin B,
magnesium, and selenium—all plentiful in this cyclical
eating plan—play an important role in reducing stress by
lowering cortisol and adrenaline levels, according to research
in a 2016 issue of the Journal of Nutrition & Food Sciences.
When you ignore your body’s cyclical needs, you might not
be getting the proper amounts of these micronutrients at the
right times, which could ramp up your stress levels,
especially in the second half of the cycle when women
naturally release more cortisol. When you aren’t eating in a
cyclical way, your body will create cortisol spikes to
compensate for fluctuating blood sugar levels when insulin
can’t keep up. Some women who don’t metabolize estrogen
efficiently may feel anxious during ovulation, when hormone
levels are at their highest. And as estrogen recedes
dramatically leading up to your period, you can feel
depressed. Eliminating certain food groups, as is common in
many popular diets, limits your exposure to key
micronutrients, also creating stress in the body.
The cyclical advantage: When you tap into your cyclical
nature by eating the right foods for the right phases, you
ensure that you’re giving your body the micronutrients it
needs to keep stress at bay—even during those premenstrual
days. When you’re feeling frazzled, seafood, avocado, and
dark chocolate will soothe your stressed-out system.
YOUR GENETIC BLUEPRINT
Your individual genetic makeup can tell you so much
about your health. These days, thanks to companies that
offer genetic testing, it’s easy to discover predispositions
for diseases, such as breast and ovarian cancer,
Alzheimer’s disease, and celiac disease. What you may not
realize is that these tests can also reveal clues to your
hormonal health. For example, researchers in a 2016
edition of the journal PAIN pinpointed a genetic variant
associated with severe menstrual cramps. Genetic
scientists writing in a 2009 issue of Nature Genetics have
identified ten gene variants that determine when you’ll get
your first period, and thirteen other gene variants tied to
the age you’ll shift into menopause. Certain gene
mutations may point to a predisposition for hormonal
sensitivity. The consumer DNA company 23 and Me tests
for a genetic risk for blood clots, which may indicate you
aren’t a good candidate for synthetic birth control. In her
book Sweetening the Pill, Holly Grigg-Spall detailed how
health care professionals dole out prescriptions for
hormonal birth control without much of a warning that it
might not be safe for you based on your genetics. With
genetic testing these days, you can even discover if you’d
be better off avoiding caffeine. (I’ll explore the caffeine-
gene connection in greater detail below.)
Imagine having this knowledge before your hormones
get totally out of whack, before the pill has wreaked havoc
with your system, and before you’ve become a caffeine
junkie. The earlier you have this knowledge, the sooner
you can start taking steps to support your system to avoid
hormonal symptoms from developing. Research also
shows that you can positively impact gene expression with
diet and lifestyle. And if you’re already suffering from
period problems, exhaustion, or any number of physical or
mental health issues, genetic testing can give you the hard
evidence you might need to inspire you to start getting in
sync with your cycle.
Caffeine: Biohacking Wonder or FLO
Blocker?
Coffee, especially the kind made with a dollop of butter or ghee,
has recently emerged as a high-performance, fat-burning, energy-
boosting, cravings-busting tool for biohackers, and if you’re going
to have it, that way is helpful. But much of the research in this
arena, once again, has been done on men and doesn’t factor in our
cyclical hormonal reality. So, what’s the real deal on caffeine and
women? Let me share a story that forever changed my relationship
with caffeine. I was twenty-something and went to my
gynecologist for my annual checkup. During my breast exam, my
doctor found a lump and asked a couple other doctors to come in
to examine it. If you’ve ever had your doctor tell you there’s a
lump in your breast, you know how terrifying it can be. After what
seemed like an eternity, they informed me it was just a cyst. A cyst
is a benign fluid-filled sac that can be found in women of any age.
I was so relieved it wasn’t serious, but I wanted to know what
might have caused it. “Do you consume a lot of caffeine?” she
asked me. I was a college student studying for my finals. Of
course I was drinking a lot of caffeine! When she informed me
caffeine increases the tendency of breast tissue to produce cysts, I
cut out all forms of caffeine cold turkey and have been caffeine-
free ever since. And based on the research that continues to
emerge, I’m so glad I listened to that early warning signal from
my body.
We all know not to consume caffeine when we’re pregnant or
breastfeeding, but science shows coffee and other caffeinated
beverages, such as energy drinks and sodas, are terrible for the
female ecosystem at any stage. Here are five reasons women
should avoid coffee and caffeine in general, especially if you have
PMS, are trying to conceive, or have a diagnosed menstrual issue.
1. Caffeine may lead to the development of breast and ovarian
cysts. For women with PCOS, fibroids, endometriosis,
ovarian cysts, or fibrocystic breasts, consuming caffeine is a
sure-fire way to fuel the development of benign cysts. For
women who haven’t been diagnosed with a hormonal
condition but who have hormonal sensitivity, drinking
beverages that give you a buzz may not produce cysts, but it
can disrupt your monthly cycle.
2. Your genes impact your ability to metabolize caffeine safely.
Are you one of those people who can have a double espresso
after dinner and sleep like a baby, or does a single latte keep
you up all night? It depends on your genetics. Emerging
research on genetics has zeroed in on a gene called CYP1A2,
which controls an enzyme of the same name that breaks
down caffeine in the liver. Variants of this gene dictate how
well your liver is able to break down and eliminate caffeine
from your system. Based on your gene variation, your body
will either produce a lot of this enzyme, making you a “fast
metabolizer” (and a successful caffeine imbiber), or only a
little, putting you in the “slow metabolizer” category. Less
than half the population produces an abundance of this
enzyme, according to genetic testing company 23 and Me.
What does this information have to do with your cycle? The
CYP1A2 gene is also involved in metabolizing estrogen. If
you’re a slow caffeine metabolizer, you’re probably a slow
estrogen metabolizer, too. When you drink coffee or energy
drinks, your liver has to work overtime to eliminate the
caffeine and may not have the micronutrient reserves
available to flush excess estrogen out of your system. If
you’re a slow metabolizer, take note. A 2006 study in JAMA
showed slow metabolizers who drink two or more cups of
coffee a day have a higher risk of a nonfatal heart attack.
With an increased risk for excess estrogen and a heart attack,
it’s a good idea to find out whether you’re a slow metabolizer
before you get hooked on caffeine.
3. Caffeine decreases fertility rates. The negative impact
caffeine has on fertility—in both women and men—is
alarming. If you’re trying to conceive, you need to kick the
habit now! Here is some of the latest research linking
caffeine intake to infertility and miscarriage:
Caffeine increases cortisol levels and stresses the
adrenals, interfering with ovulation.
Caffeine depletes vital vitamins and minerals—
including B vitamins and folate—needed for ovulation
and healthy fertility.
Drinking three or more caffeinated beverages a day prior
to conception increases the risk of miscarriage by 74
percent, according to 2016 research in Fertility and
Sterility.
4. Caffeine depletes micronutrients essential for hormone
balance. Caffeine may reduce the absorption of key nutrients
and minerals—such as magnesium and B vitamins—that are
critical for hormonal balance.
5. The acidity in coffee can alter the microbiome. Coffee’s high
acid content can cause an imbalance in your gut flora,
reducing your body’s ability to absorb micronutrients. So
even if you’re eating healthful foods, your body may not be
benefiting from all the vitamins and minerals they contain.
Without adequate micronutrients, it’s harder for your
endocrine system to balance your hormones.
Now that you know the science behind that cup of coffee, are
you still hesitant to give it up? Rest assured: getting off the
caffeine-energy roller coaster is much easier when you’re syncing
with your cycle, because you’re stabilizing your blood sugar and
energy levels. For my clients who are hooked on caffeine, I
generally recommend a gradual step-down approach to quitting,
downshifting to half-caf, replacing with decaf, then switching to
rooibos. This approach works even if you’re drinking eight cups
of coffee a day, as my client Lucinda was. She was experiencing a
whole host of hormonal symptoms, and when she learned that
caffeine could be contributing to those issues, she wanted to kick
the habit. She started syncing with her cycle and at the same time
began tapering down her intake; within a few months she was
caffeine-free. She was so happy to find that as her caffeine intake
decreased, so did her hormonal symptoms.
Getting in tune with your cyclical biochemistry naturally
boosts your energy reserves, so you don’t need to look to outside
sources like coffee or energy drinks for a quick buzz. And when
you do feel your energy waning, you’ll realize it’s just your body’s
way of telling you that it’s time to rest and recharge. If you ignore
that signal and slurp up a caffeinated drink to stay in productivity
mode, the caffeine can have short- and long-term hormonal and
inflammatory impacts on your overall health, moods, and fertility.
Let’s Cook!
It’s not just about what and when: how you prepare your food
matters, too. According to traditional Chinese medicine, foods are
believed to have warming or cooling effects on the body. These
effects play into your hormonal cycle. When estrogen levels rise
during follicular and ovulatory phases, the body becomes warmer.
When you’re following this cyclical program, it’s best to
counteract this tendency by consuming cooling foods, such as raw
vegetables. On the flip side, when estrogen levels decline during
the late luteal and menstrual phases, you can support your system
by focusing on warming foods and cooking methods.
Follicular: As estrogen levels begin to rise during the
follicular phase, opt for light cooking methods, such as
steaming or sautéing.
Ovulatory: As estrogen surges, your body is at its warmest
during ovulation. This is the ideal time to enjoy fresh, raw
foods, such as veggies, fruit, and salads. Juices and smoothies
are also great cooling options. When cooking, stick to lighter
preparations, such as steaming or poaching.
Luteal: When estrogen levels dip during the luteal phase, opt
for warming cooking methods, such as roasting or baking.
Menstrual: Your body is at its coolest level during
menstruation, so prepare warm, hearty foods such as soups
and stews.
Weight Loss and Why Diet Trends Leave
You Feeling like You’ve Failed
Are you one of those women who has tried every diet, without
success? Or maybe you managed to lose some weight, but you felt
miserable in the process, started having period problems, and
ended up gaining back all the weight you lost? I hear stories like
these on a regular basis from the women who seek me out for
help. Weight loss can be tricky for women for a number of reasons
—which have nothing to do with willpower! Here’s the truth:
Popular diets don’t take hormonal fluctuations into
consideration. They expect you to eat the same way every
day. As you’ve seen in this chapter, it makes no sense to
consume the same foods day in and day out. Many trendy
diets—think low-carb, intermittent fasting, and keto—were
not created with women’s biochemistry and hormonal cycles
in mind. Just look up studies on intermittent fasting, and
you’ll discover that most of them have been done on males or
postmenopausal women. And you’ll see later that the few
studies that do include women—or female rats—clearly show
we do not get the same results as our male counterparts. In
fact, some of these diets can disrupt your cycle, interfere with
your biological systems, and set you up for failure.
Your caloric needs shift throughout your cycle. In the
second half of your cycle you naturally burn 89–279 more
calories per day and have an increased appetite, but diets
don’t account for this difference.
You have a greater opportunity to burn fat in the first
half of your cycle. Leveraging this advantage is key to
lasting weight loss.
You have to heal your hormones first. If you’re struggling
with any menstrual conditions, you need to focus on
balancing your hormonal levels before you think about
cutting calories, eliminating carbohydrates, or any other
method of dieting. Otherwise, you won’t get rid of that
stubborn fat and are likely to make your period symptoms
worse. As a former PCOS sufferer, I know firsthand how
important it is to balance hormones before trying to lose
weight. At one point I weighed more than 200 pounds, and I
tried every diet I could find. I followed them to the letter,
whether the diet involved counting calories, weighing my
food, or eliminating entire food groups from my meals. But
nothing worked. I couldn’t drop the weight, and my
hormonal symptoms got worse. It was so frustrating, and for
a long time I thought I was the problem. What I learned is
that the whole premise of separating out weight, skin issues,
period issues, mood issues—or any other health issues, for
that matter—just does not reflect how the body works. All
aspects of our health are interconnected with our hormonal
cycle and our natural biological rhythms. Trying to solve one
issue without addressing the underlying hormonal issues is a
recipe for failure. When you give your biochemistry the
support it needs, your systems start to hum—it might even
feel like magic—and your weight, energy, and skin issues
will no longer be such a struggle.
Don’t get me wrong: many popular diets have benefits for
women—if you take your biology into account. If you’re still
interested in trying one of the current diet trends (keto,
intermittent fasting, grain-free, raw vegan, macrobiotic, or calorie
restriction), let’s first look at how they impact your hormones and
how you can use these diets to your advantage.
The Ketogenic Diet
The ketogenic diet is a low-carb, high-fat plan. Its primary goal is
to trigger ketosis, a natural metabolic state that occurs when you
don’t take in enough carbohydrates, which are your body’s
number one source of energy. When your body doesn’t have carbs
to burn for energy, it switches to burning fat as a fuel source. The
concept is simple: burn fat, get leaner, lose weight. There are
several variations of the keto diet, but the most common one—the
Standard Ketogenic Diet—recommends eating 75 percent fat, 20
percent protein, and no more than—gulp!—5 percent
carbohydrates. That ratio typically means consuming less than 50
grams of carbs (or even as little as 20 grams in some cases) a day.
To put those numbers into perspective, consider that one cup of
cooked oatmeal provides about 30 grams of carbs. The keto diet is
like an extreme version of the paleo diet or the Atkins diet, both of
which emphasize protein and fat over carbs.
Advantage: Filling up on protein and fat helps keep you
feeling full, and focusing on fresh, whole foods reduces the
amount of processed junk you’ll be eating.
Hormonal disadvantage: Burning fat sounds like a good
thing, but the keto diet may not be so good for women.
Animal protein–heavy diets can also lead to liver congestion
and estrogen dominance, which is the biggest culprit in
hormonal dysfunction. Mark Sisson, author of The Keto
Reset Diet, says, “Women need to take special precautions
when implementing a ketogenic diet.” He understands that
women’s biology is more sensitive to calorie restriction,
because our bodies are finely tuned to conserve nutrients for
fertility. To adapt a keto diet for your feminine biochemistry,
he says to avoid intentionally restricting calories, combining
keto and intermittent fasting, or being too strict. Another
reason to think twice before going keto is the potential
impact of the diet on thyroid health. Research is mixed, but
much of it suggests that the diet affects T3 production. It’s
important to take this issue into consideration because
thyroid problems are five to eight times more common in
women than in men, and many women struggle with
hypothyroidism, making weight loss even more challenging.
Intermittent Fasting
Intermittent fasting (IF) is a popular diet that involves cycling
between periods when you consume food and others when you
skip eating. The concept draws on the notion that our cave-
dwelling ancestors went through periods of feasting—after a
successful hunt—and fasting. Advocates claim this is the way our
bodies were naturally intended to operate and say it can help
regulate blood sugar and burn fat. IF can take many forms. A few
of the more common strategies involve fasting two days a week
and eating normally the other five days, or eating during an eight-
hour window during the day and fasting the other sixteen hours.
Advantage: Some studies have linked IF with increased
weight loss, reduced body fat, enhanced insulin sensitivity,
improved cognitive function, a lower risk for various
diseases, and improved new cell growth.
Hormonal disadvantage: IF takes a toll on your hormonal
and biological systems in a number of ways. For example,
Sara Gottfried, a physician and author of several books,
including The Hormone Reset Diet, explains that IF may
cause adverse effects in people with blood sugar issues.
Fasting causes blood sugar to plummet, and feasting causes it
to spike. Anything that causes blood sugar imbalances is
harmful for hormonal health.
But what about those studies that show all those benefits of
IF? As you might suspect, most of the studies on intermittent
fasting have been done on males, and the few that include females
tell a very different story. A 2005 study in Obesity Research
concluded that IF enhanced insulin sensitivity in men but
worsened it in women. A 2013 study on intermittent fasting in rats
in PLOS ONE found that females experienced a reduction in the
size of their ovaries, stopped ovulating, and had sleep problems.
The bad news keeps coming. In 2018, researchers found that
fasting for two days caused moderate stress in overweight women.
The Keto Reset Diet author Mark Sisson concluded that compared
with men, “As it stands right now, I’d be inclined to agree that
pre-menopausal (and perhaps peri-menopausal) women are more
likely to have poor—or at least different—experiences with
intermittent fasting (at least as a weight loss tool).” In my opinion,
the only fasting schedule that is safe and effective for women is to
avoid food for a 12-hour period daily, from 7 p.m. to 7 a.m.
Gluten-Free/Grain-Free
These days, it’s common to find restaurants that offer gluten-free
menu items, and grocery store shelves are stocked with gluten-free
products. Gluten—the protein found in wheat, barley, and rye—
has been villainized in recent years for its potentially detrimental
health effects. Although its connection to celiac disease is well
known, and an increasing number of people are becoming aware
of gluten sensitivity, what isn’t common knowledge is gluten’s
negative impact on hormonal health, which is why I recommend
eliminating it from your diet when you’re syncing with your cycle.
Many popular diets, such as paleo, advocate excluding all grains
to promote weight loss. Of course, you should stick to grains you
can tolerate.
Advantage: Some people find that removing gluten or all
grains provides relief from stomach pain, bloating, and even
brain fog, while others go gluten-free or grain-free for fast
weight loss. If you have leaky gut or other allergies, limiting
these gluten or all grains can be beneficial.
Hormonal disadvantage: I meet with many women who
think going grain-free will put an end to their cravings and
binge eating, only to discover that being grain-free actually
increased cravings and made the women even more
vulnerable to binge moments. This pattern results in irregular
insulin levels, which can interfere with ovulation, disrupt
metabolism, and put the brakes on fat loss. A grain-free diet
can also be problematic in the second half of your cycle,
when women’s blood sugar levels are lower. During the
luteal phase, we need to consume more complex carbs to help
stabilize glucose, insulin, and estrogen levels. If you’ve been
following a grain-free diet and the notion of adding grains
during your luteal phase concerns you, experiment with root
vegetables and try a grain like buckwheat that is very easy to
tolerate to see how you feel.
Raw Vegan
A vegan diet is based on vegetables, fruits, nuts, seeds, and other
plant-based foods. It excludes all animal products—no meat, no
fish, no eggs, no dairy. A raw vegan diet dictates that you can’t
heat any of the plant-based foods you eat over 104 to 118 degrees.
You also need to avoid any foods that are pasteurized, refined,
treated with pesticides, or processed. Advocates of raw veganism
believe cooking destroys important enzymes and reduces the
nutritional content of foods.
Advantage: It’s always beneficial to consume lots of
organic, fiber-rich fruits and veggies. Plant-based foods
provide many health benefits, including better digestion,
improved heart health, lower cholesterol, and reduced
inflammation. Rich in antioxidants, they can clear up acne,
reduce signs of aging, and according to some research,
contribute to cancer prevention.
Hormonal disadvantage: A raw vegan diet can disrupt your
cycle. In a trial published in Annals of Nutrition &
Metabolism, about 30 percent of women on a raw food diet
experienced missing periods. If your gut microbiome is out
of whack, it’s harder for your body to absorb the healthy
nutrients found in raw foods. Over time, this difficulty can
lead to a micronutrient deficiency. A lack of the essential
nutrients for hormonal balance can wreak havoc with your
cycle, cause your period to go MIA, and increase PMS
symptoms. A lack of those nutrients can also lead to weight
gain, which is the exact opposite of what you’re trying to
achieve on a diet. Sticking solely to raw foods throughout
your entire cycle is too cooling, according to Chinese
medicine, and can cause your reproductive system to get
sluggish—think late periods and delayed ovulation. You can
even experience lighter periods as a result. Veggie-heavy raw
vegan diets also typically lack the adequate amino acids
necessary to produce sufficient hormone levels.
Macrobiotic Diet
Steeped in ancient Eastern tradition and rooted in yin-yang theory,
macrobiotic diets were popularized in Western society in the
1960s and focus on whole grains, vegetables, beans, and bean
products, such as soy and tempeh. Things that don’t get the green
light on a macrobiotic menu include meat, processed foods,
refined sugar, sodas, and coffee.
Advantage: Plant-based, high-fiber, low-fat diets have been
found to lower inflammation and reduce the risk of heart
disease and cancer. These diets are also high in
micronutrients.
Hormonal disadvantage: Processed soy is one of the worst
foods for women. Soy products contain high levels of
phytoestrogens that mimic the body’s natural estrogens.
Women with estrogen-dominance hormonal imbalance
conditions—including endometriosis, PCOS, fibroids, and
ovarian cysts—are particularly sensitive to the
phytoestrogens in processed soy. Processed soy is found in
substitute products, such as soy milk, soy meat, soy cheese,
and soy yogurt. Fermented, organic, unprocessed soy—
known as tempeh, miso, and natto—can be very helpful when
consumed in small amounts.
Calorie Restriction
Extreme calorie restriction (CR), which typically involves
reducing your caloric intake by 25 to 50 percent, encourages
people to simply eat less for the rest of their lives.
Advantage: Restricting calories has been associated with
lower risks of major diseases and increased longevity.
Hormonal disadvantage: You might lose weight during the
first half of your cycle, but you may gain it back during the
second half, putting you right back at square one. Also, when
your BMI drops below a certain number because of calorie
restriction, your cycle may be completely disrupted—
preventing ovulation and eliminating your period altogether.
Female rats experienced a drop in fertility, ovary shrinkage,
increased menstrual cycle irregularity, and enlarged adrenal
glands related to calorie restriction in a 2006 study in the
American Journal of Physiology. CR has also been linked to
bone density loss in women.
Cycling Through Popular Diets
Do the potential disadvantages mean you need to steer clear of all
of these diets? Not necessarily. But as you’ve seen throughout this
book, you need to make sure you’re getting the whole story as it
relates to your female biochemistry. All of these diets completely
ignore our cyclical, fluctuating hormones and are geared solely to
the 24-hour biological clock. Diets that advocate eating the same
foods day in and day out don’t sync with our cyclical nature. And
diets that restrict or eliminate essential macro- and micronutrients
prevent you from getting the adequate nourishment your body
needs for hormonal balance. Restricting any food group can set
you up for micronutrient deficiency, which can be exacerbated if
your microbiome is already compromised, you’ve been on the
birth control pill, or you have any kind of hormonal imbalance.
And restricting in one area generally means overdoing it in
another, which can throw your body off balance as well. It is
possible to benefit from these trendy diets without the hormonal
downside—if you vary the diets based on the phases of your
menstrual cycle. Here’s a look at how you could include popular
diets in a cyclical way to maximize their effectiveness and support
your hormones.
A Cyclical Diet Plan
Phase Diet Why It Works
Follicular Calorie During the follicular phase, appetite
restriction/IF is suppressed, so it’s easier for your
body to handle a reduction in
calories, which can help with weight
loss in the first half of your cycle.
Ovulatory Raw vegan As estrogen peaks, vegetables aid in
metabolizing the hormone to prevent
an excessive buildup and to avoid
estrogen dominance. As your body
temperature rises during this phase, it
is an ideal time to consider a raw
vegan diet.
Luteal Macrobiotic, Your body needs more calories
complex during this phase, and slow-burning
carbs complex carbs and beans provide
calories while stabilizing blood
sugar.
Menstrual Keto, paleo, As hormone levels and your body
or grain-free temperature drop during this phase,
skip the foods that promote estrogen
metabolism and stick to warming
foods. A keto, paleo, or grain-free
diet can give your body what it needs
during your monthly bleed.
Syncing with Your Cycle in the Kitchen
Cooking: Keep It Simple, Smarty!
You don’t have to be a master chef to make the Cycle Syncing
Method™ work for you. I don’t really like to spend a lot of time in
the kitchen, and I wouldn’t call myself a gourmet chef. For me,
cooking is more about focusing on phase-specific nutritional
value, not culinary skills or pretty plating. In general, I like to
keep things as simple as possible. The concept of syncing with
your cycle is based on this philosophy—simplifying your life
while amplifying your health. Here are some things I do to make
meal prep a breeze and what we suggest to our members in the
Cycle Syncing Membership:
Sync your shopping: Before I go grocery shopping, I check
the Foods for Your Cycle chart included earlier in this
chapter and make a short list of phase-appropriate ingredients
for the week.
More prep, less cooking: I’ve devised a strategy so I only
have to “cook” twice a week in big batches. On Sunday I
focus on prepping and assembling the main ingredients for
meals for the next few days; then, if necessary, I’ll repeat this
process on Thursday. Then it’s so much easier to quickly put
things together for lunches and work-night dinners. I’ll
always make a grain, a bean dish, a protein, and two veggies
—and from there, the potential leftover combinations are
varied and easy.
Cook in big batches: I like to find ways to stretch my
cooking so it lasts for several days. For example, if I roast a
whole chicken on Sunday, I will use it in soup, sandwiches,
and salads throughout the week. I will also use it to make a
healthy, nutrient-dense bone broth.
Simplify your pairings: I like to keep our meals to no more
than two or three main elements. For example, in my luteal
phase, I might prepare turkey, sweet potatoes, and mustard
greens. To make cooking even quicker, I prepare the elements
all the same way, whether I’m baking, boiling, roasting, or
sautéing. See—I told you it was simple!
Sample Daily Meal Plans for the Four Phases of Your
Cycle
Check the end of this book for daily meal plans for each phase of
the cycle and for sample recipes from the Cycle Syncing
Membership.
Stop Stressing! Syncing with Your Cycle Is
Easier Than You Think
“Do I have to be totally precise?”
“Do I have to do everything to get results?”
“If I eat a food that’s off-phase, will it mess everything up?”
“I have a full-time job and kids. Is this going to require a lot of
time-consuming effort?”
I often hear these questions from women who are new to a
cyclical approach to life. The answer to all these questions is no!
You can stop stressing about trying to be perfect at syncing your
cycle, and stop worrying that it won’t fit into your schedule. In
fact, adopting just a few of the suggested tweaks is enough to start
seeing and feeling the benefits. And because the nature of your
cycle is fluid, with one phase flowing gradually into the next, you
can give yourself some wiggle room. For example, even though
you’re only in the ovulatory phase for three to four days, your
body is still in transition for a few days before and after, so it’s
okay to dedicate a full week to the foods that support ovulation.
Even if you’re transitioning from the follicular or into the luteal
phase, you can still benefit from the ovulatory-phase foods for
their various liver-supportive and estrogen-metabolizing benefits.
There’s no need to berate yourself with thoughts like, “Oh no! Did
I eat an extra day of follicular food when I’m actually ovulating?”
It’s okay to be experimental and see what works for you. The goal
of the Cycle Syncing Method™ isn’t to try to be perfect or to be
worried that you’ll screw it up. The whole point is for you to learn
about your body and what it needs, so you can do better with your
next cycle. If you want more recipes, shopping lists, and support
as you adapt to syncing with your cycle, you can dive deeper with
a community of women who are using this revolutionary “un-diet”
approach at www.cyclesyncingmembership.com/bonus. You’ll
also find a number of helpful tools and additional information,
including phase-specific meals, workout videos, planners, live
coaching, and support.
Of course, if you have any food intolerances or struggle with
autoimmune disease, you can omit any foods that are on your
personal no-go list. This cyclical program is very different from
traditional diets that dictate what you can and cannot eat. This
method—remember, it’s a method, not a diet!—is intended to
increase your intake of foods that support your hormonal
fluctuations. At its core, this program is additive, not reductive.
This approach is reflective of your feminine energy—abundant,
generous, and nurturing. Syncing with your cycle should never
make you feel deprived; it should make you feel good.
A NOTE ON EATING DISORDERS
Many women with anorexia, orthorexia, or binge-eating
disorders have told me that cycling their foods helped them
finally unhook from disordered eating. Some women
develop eating disorders following puberty, which could
be in response to society’s overarching message that we
should feel the same and act the same every day. When
menarche unlocks our cyclical nature, we feel the need to
find ways to deny our biological reality, and some of us
begin controlling our food intake. Syncing your food with
your cycle gives you permission to unravel the thinking
that pushes you toward unhealthy eating patterns.
Five Quick-Start Strategies to Ease into the Cycle
Syncing Method™
When you’re just beginning to sync your food with your cycle,
you don’t have to change everything at once. It’s okay to take
baby steps. In fact, I’ve found that many women are more
successful when they make just a few small changes at the outset
and gradually fine-tune things while growing more accustomed to
the program. Give yourself time to get used to this new way of
thinking, cooking, and eating. It will take some thought at first,
but before long it will be second nature. If you want to dip your
toe into a cyclical way of eating before diving in head first, try one
of the following strategies. I created these quick-start plans for
women like me who are busy building a business or a career,
tending to their families, and struggling to find “me” time.
Quick Start 1: Rotate your veggies only. Veggies are such an
important way to help your body get the micronutrients it needs,
which is critical for optimal hormone production for your
biological systems. Just choose a few of the options from the list
below based on the phase you’re in. What could be simpler than
that?
Follicular: Artichoke, broccoli, carrot, green peas, parsley,
string beans, zucchini
Ovulatory: Asparagus, Brussels sprouts, chard, escarole,
scallion, spinach
Luteal: Cauliflower, collard greens, daikon, onion, parsnip,
radish, squash, sweet potato
Menstrual: Beet, kale, kelp, mushrooms
Quick Start 2: Sync when PMS strikes. Many women begin
syncing their cycle by focusing on the most troublesome part of
their cycle—the late luteal phase, when PMS symptoms tend to
kick in. Add more complex carbs—think sweet potatoes, brown
rice, chickpeas, and apples—to your diet on the days when PMS
usually hits, and see how you feel. Do you feel happier? Do your
headaches disappear? Are you sleeping better?
Quick Start 3: Sync to curb cramps. If cramps are your
main period problem, focus on changing the fats you eat during
the menstrual phase. For example, foods that are high in omega-3
fatty acids, such as wild salmon, are beneficial for combating
period cramps.
Quick Start 4: Sync your cooking methods. I’ve worked
with many women who begin syncing their cycle by focusing
solely on the way they prepare their foods to balance the body’s
natural cooling and warming rhythms. Here’s a cheat sheet for
you:
Follicular: steaming, sautéing
Ovulatory: raw foods, salads, juices, smoothies, steaming,
poaching
Luteal: roasting, baking
Menstrual: soups and stews
Quick Start 5: Try seed cycling. Some women have
experienced a reduction in hormonal symptoms by consuming
certain seeds as part of their cyclical routine. Here’s how to do it:
First half of your cycle: When estrogen levels are rising,
consume one tablespoon each per day of flaxseeds and
pumpkin seeds. Flaxseeds are high in lignans, which act as
estrogen blockers to reduce excess estrogen. Pumpkin seeds
are high in zinc, which sets the stage for progesterone
production in the luteal phase.
Second half of your cycle: When progesterone levels rise,
switch to one tablespoon each per day of sesame and
sunflower seeds. The lignans in sesame seeds—not as
abundant as in flaxseeds—help prevent the buildup of excess
estrogen while their high zinc content promotes progesterone
production. The high concentration of selenium in sunflower
seeds supports liver detoxification, while an abundance of
vitamin E contributes to healthy progesterone levels.
Keep Yourself in the FLO
The Cycle Syncing Method™ isn’t a quick fix that you adopt
temporarily, then quit. It is a long-term solution and a proactive
way to live in harmony with your hormones. I created this
program because after I resolved my own issues with PCOS, I
wanted to make sure I didn’t have any relapsing symptoms. I
never wanted to have cystic acne, extra weight, or irregular
periods again. If I reverted to my former diet and lifestyle—dairy,
gluten, sugar, caffeine, disconnection from my body and stress—
my symptoms would absolutely come back. I wanted to make sure
that didn’t happen because it was such a hard-earned victory, and
syncing with my cycle gave me that protection.
For you, syncing with your cycle is a way to heal hormonal
issues and so much more. When you adopt this way of living,
you’ll feel the positive effects in so many areas of your life. You’ll
be reaching a healthy weight, improving overall well-being,
building energy, achieving more, getting in the flow, and feeling
happier. The Cycle Syncing Method™ is the ultimate insurance
policy for living your best life.
Chapter 5
Work Out Less, Get More Fit
It’s time to acknowledge, treat, train, and fuel
women as the different physiological beings we
are.
—STACY T. SIMS, PHD
S
everal years ago, a woman named Alicia arrived at the
center. Frustrated, she told me she had been training for a
triathlon as a way to lose weight, but it was having the
opposite effect. “I don’t get it,” she said. “I’m working out
more than ever, but I’ve gained twenty pounds! What’s
happening?” Alicia wasn’t the only woman with this problem.
I started seeing client after client complaining of packing on
pounds despite logging hours and hours exercising. These
women wanted to know why they were gaining weight when
the prevailing wisdom seemed so simple: if you work out
harder and more often, you’ll lose weight. Their experiences
didn’t add up, and my curiosity was fired to figure out why
this was happening. As I delved into science for the answer,
what I discovered revolutionized my thinking about women
and exercise.
If you’re like most of the women I meet, you try to
exercise regularly, and you may have tried several of the
trendy, intense exercise classes that are available right now.
You probably feel that if you could just make it to one more
boot camp class a week, or if you just sweated it out at cycling
class more, you’d finally reach your fitness goals. But often,
even if you can find the time, money, and motivation to get to
those classes, you still don’t see the results you’re hoping for.
If you’ve been busting your butt at the gym only to find
yourself feeling exhausted, not losing weight, or worse,
somehow up a pants size, it’s time to learn why the no-pain-
no-gain strategy is holding you back. This should come as no
surprise now, but the predominant “go hard or go home”
mindset is geared to the 24-hour biological clock and
maximizing the male physique. It’s part of the perpetual
harvest concept you read about in chapter 2. But just as our
bodies aren’t intended to be in endless go, go, go mode,
neither are they supposed to be engaged in intense workouts
every day. Doing the same routines week in and week out
doesn’t work with our 28-day clock. As you now understand,
your body isn’t the same every day, so it makes no sense to
stick to the same sweat-inducing workout routine day in and
day out. It’s time to learn how to exercise in rhythm with your
cyclical nature, not against it, so you can hit peak physical
performance, feel more energized after your workouts, and get
off the weight loss–weight gain roller coaster.
The Truth About Female Hormones,
Metabolism, and Exercise
As you might suspect, when I was digging into the research
for answers to why my clients were gaining weight when they
increased their workouts, I found that most exercise studies
were performed on men or postmenopausal women.
Consequently, most of the expert advice we get on exercise—
how often to do it, how much to push yourself, which types
are best—is geared toward optimizing male fitness. This
advice is just not applicable to female biochemistry, which is
why you don’t get the results you expect. Fitness trends and
training regimens simply don’t take the female hormonal cycle
into consideration. In part, we can blame the shortage of
research on the relationship between the metabolic and
physiological effects of exercise and the menstrual cycle. A
2017 British Journal of Sports Medicine review of 1,382
sports and exercise–related studies from 2011 to 2013
confirmed that women are underrepresented in the research.
This review revealed that only 39 percent of the more than six
million participants involved in those studies were women.
And among the studies that did include the double-X
chromosome crowd, participation was often limited to women
who were in the early follicular phase of their cycle, when
hormone levels favor fat loss. This underrepresentation of
women results in a skewed view of the effects of exercise and
contributes to the collective belief that women should push
harder and do intensive workouts every day.
In the first half of your cycle, you burn fat more easily and
gain lean muscle. With normal blood sugar levels, your body
more easily accesses carbohydrates for fuel. This all adds up to
greater energy and stamina, so you can crush it in spin class,
boot camp, or high-intensity interval training (HIIT) and feel
great afterward. A 2017 study in PLOS ONE on female soccer
players concluded they had better endurance during the first
half of the cycle than in the luteal phase. Another bonus during
the follicular phase is that higher testosterone levels help your
body build muscle more efficiently. In fact, some studies,
including a 2014 trial in Springerplus, have found that when
you strength train during the follicular phase, you get stronger
and gain more lean muscle than when you train during the
luteal phase. The follicular phase is when you can crank up the
intensity, hit it hard at the gym, and see the weight melt off.
But you can’t do high-intensity training throughout your
entire cycle. A study published in a 2008 issue of Biological
Rhythm Research concluded that too much intense exercise
may lead to irregular or missed periods, which are a clear sign
of hormonal imbalance. On the flip side, hormonal imbalances
were found to have a negative impact on exercise endurance,
muscular strength, and metabolism. This vicious circle can
leave you feeling exhausted and prevent you from getting the
results you want.
In the second half of your cycle, your metabolism speeds
up and you naturally burn more calories, but intense exercise
works against this effect by pumping out the stress hormone
cortisol, which leads to fat storage and muscle wasting.
Estrogen, testosterone, and your blood sugar levels dip. This
saps your energy, causes you to sweat more, and makes that
spin class or boot camp feel a lot more challenging than it did
just a few weeks earlier. I’m here to tell you: it’s not you—it’s
the workout! Research in a 2003 study in Sports Medicine
shows that women reach exhaustion faster during the
midluteal phase than in the first half of the cycle. Endurance
activities aren’t the only area that suffers during the second
half of your cycle. You don’t make the same gains from
strength training, and you’re actually more likely to experience
an athletic injury during the luteal phase and first few days of
menstruation than during the first half of your cycle. If you
suffer from PMS, you may be at even greater risk for injury
during the premenstrual days, according to a 2003 study in
Gynecological Endocrinology. Trying to “just do it” during the
second half of your cycle, even though your body is telling
you to take it down a notch, can sabotage your exercise efforts.
All that hard work you put in during the follicular phase just
goes to waste, and you end up right back where you started.
Nutrition scientist, exercise physiologist, and triathlete
Stacy T. Sims discovered the luteal slump when she was
competing in the grueling Ironman Kona race. In her book
Roar: How to Match Your Food and Fitness to Your Female
Physiology for Optimum Performance, Great Health, and a
Strong, Lean Body for Life, Sims recounts how she developed
a headache and swelling during the second half of the race,
clear signs of hyponatremia, a condition in which the sodium
concentration in the blood falls below normal. She managed to
complete the race but wasn’t happy with her finish time. What
went wrong, she wondered? She had trained to acclimate to
the heat and followed the same gender-neutral nutrition
regimen as most racers. When she polled her fellow female
participants, she made a surprising discovery. The ones who
were in the late luteal phase of their cycle, as Sims was, also
experienced issues that cramped their performance. The
women who were in the follicular phase of their cycle had no
problems and finished with great times. Sims realized she
needed to start tweaking her training regimen to work with her
cyclical biochemistry, not against it. “I went to work
researching how hormones impact thermoregulation,
macronutrient usage, hydration, performance, and recovery,”
she says. “Right out of the gate, it was apparent that sex
differences extend far beyond ponytails and sports bras.” How
right she is!
You don’t have to be a triathlete to benefit from some
exercise optimization. But if you want to get the most out of
your workout, it is essential to plan your exercise with each
phase of your cycle in mind. And just as you saw in chapter 2
how our body’s biochemistry naturally drives us to alternate
between periods of productivity and rest, your workouts also
need to honor this rhythm. Going hard all the time is what our
culture admires, and many women interpret that to mean doing
intense cardio on a daily basis. But cardio is only one aspect of
the fitness equation. Gaining lean muscle, improving
flexibility, and recovery are equally important. Adopting a
well-rounded routine requires shedding the cultural
conditioning we have around what “fitness” looks like—
starting with the idea that the path to a healthy body lies in
sweat and suffering.
When Less Is More—Seriously!
Like me, you’ve probably been indoctrinated into the exercise
cult of “more is good, harder is better.” We all look at
professional female athletes with their lean physiques and
think they are the picture of health. But even though they may
look great on the outside, they aren’t necessarily hormonally
balanced on the inside. Ironman champion and professional
triathlete Meredith Kessler, who was already running long
distances as a teenager, admitted she hadn’t gotten her first
period by the time she was nineteen, and she had developed
borderline osteoporosis due to lack of estrogen. There’s
nothing healthy about that! Thankfully, she says she has since
fixed those issues. Extreme exercise and dieting can lead to
serious consequences and something health care experts call
the female athlete triad: inadequate nutrition for the amount of
training, irregular or missing periods, and prematurely low
bone density. It’s clear that more and harder exercise isn’t the
answer for women.
In fact, doing less can be the key to getting the results you
want. When I finally realized that in addition to adapting my
eating patterns to my cycle, I needed to sync my exercise, I
easily dropped 60 pounds without having to work out
aggressively. I started working out less—seriously!—and the
extra pounds melted away. Even better, I felt energized, alert,
and motivated. The same thing happened after I gained 40
pounds while pregnant with my daughter. After giving birth, I
stopped doing all high-intensity training and switched to short
walks—no more than half an hour—and gentle Pilates. The
extra pounds melted away, and I’m back down to my feel-
good weight. I was finally able to end the war with my body. I
was thrilled, and a little bit shocked, because it went against
everything I had ever learned about fitness and weight loss.
Our female biology shines a light on why the less-is-more
approach works for us. When you get your heart pumping,
your body burns the glucose in your bloodstream for energy.
This supply lasts only about thirty minutes; after that, your
body needs to find a replacement to keep your energy up.
Where does your body turn? It calls on your adrenal glands,
and they jump into action by pumping out the stress hormone
cortisol, which converts stored fat into usable glucose so you
have the energy to continue working out. Although the fat-
burning part of this process may sound like a win-win for you,
it comes with some serious side effects. If you have
unresolved hormonal issues, such as excess estrogen—the
most common hormonal imbalance I see among my clients—
the cortisol spike and fat burning lead to something
counterproductive. The estrogen overload programs your body
to convert any circulating glucose back into fat. And estrogen
tends to cause your body to hold on to the fat cells in your
midsection and hips. Your body doubles down on the action
when those fat cells, which are hormonally active tissue, pump
out even more estrogen into your body. The more fat cells you
have, the higher your estrogen levels. And the more estrogen,
the more your body hangs on to those fat cells. So instead of
becoming a fat-burning machine, you become stuck in an ugly
cycle of burning stored fat with cortisol, only to have your
high estrogen levels send the fat right back to all the wrong
places. This is especially likely to happen in the luteal phase of
your cycle, when your body naturally pumps out more cortisol.
Even worse, if you’re suffering from adrenal fatigue,
exercising too hard or too long will cause your adrenal glands
to become overstimulated. Going all out at the gym when
you’re already dealing with the effects of chronic stress will
leave you feeling even more depleted and further strains your
adrenals. Eventually, adrenal fatigue can spiral to a point
where you can barely crawl out of bed each morning, you
struggle to get through your workouts, and you feel more
exhausted than ever. It’s a no-win situation. You force yourself
to work out because you think you’re doing something healthy
for your body—but really, you’re just compounding your
hormonal issues.
Don’t worry. There is a solution.
Work Out Smarter, Not Harder
Your rhythmic biochemistry provides a clear road map to plan
your best workouts. During each phase of the menstrual cycle,
the female body is primed and prepped to respond to different
kinds of exercise. The first half of your cycle is the ideal time
to focus on cardio and building lean muscle. In the second half
of your cycle, you’ll benefit more from skipping intense cardio
and shifting to resistance training, flexibility, and recovery.
You may even want to skip the gym altogether on some days
—and that is not only okay, it’s recommended! Finally, you
can stop beating yourself up for not doing enough. You can
stop feeling guilty if you walked out of your dance class after
half an hour. You can do less, get better results, and feel better,
too.
Letting go of the “more is good, harder is better” mentality
can be hard. In fact, you may be asking yourself, “Won’t I gain
weight if I don’t exercise with the same intensity every day?”
Women ask me this all the time. I promise you, the answer is a
resounding no! In fact, when you begin syncing with your
cycle and give yourself permission to scale back your
workouts during the second half of your cycle, you’ll start to
see results within a month or two. For example, instead of
trying to make PMS bloat go away by sweating it out on the
treadmill, you’ll find that you no longer feel bloated in the first
place. So there’s no need for that high-intensity workout. Why
keep swimming upstream?
That’s the lesson Emily, a twenty-eight-year-old fitness
and yoga instructor, finally learned after a lifetime of giving in
to the more, more, more mentality. She taught about twenty
classes a week and would push through her period pains out of
fear she might gain weight if she took time off. Eventually, her
stressed-out body began screaming for a break, and she
realized she needed to make a change. After learning about
this cyclical program, she made a commitment to start
honoring her body in a way that would support her cycle. She
started by taking off the first day of her period from teaching
and simply doing a few restorative poses on her own. Then she
began to notice that her body craved different types of
movement and intensity depending on the phase of her cycle.
By listening to that inner wisdom, she developed routines that
fueled her cycle and left her feeling energized rather than
deflated. “I’ve come to a place where I feel balanced,” she
says, adding that she doesn’t even bother weighing herself
anymore.
(DON’T) JUST DO IT
You might be saying, wait a minute, weren’t we raised
to think that we should absolutely never let our periods
get in the way or hold us back from going to gym class
in high school, from playing sports, or from training
for a marathon? Let’s unpack two problematic aspects
of this thinking:
1. The assertion that your period is a liability you must
overcome with willpower is toxic.
2. Enforcing a cultural norm—the belief that you should
work out no matter how you feel—further forces a
woman to practice actively ignoring her inner wisdom
and feel more disconnected from her body.
Why is the standard that we should go to gym class
when we’re not biorhythmically primed for it? It’s
because male biology responds well to daily exercise,
and we feel compelled to model our behavior after
theirs so we can be taken seriously, respected, and
valued. Why would any woman who has learned the
truth about her biological rhythms do high-intensity
training during a hormonal phase that would turn on
muscle wasting and fat storage?
Biological common sense requires women’s
different needs to be acknowledged and respected.
Can’t we reimagine our cultural narrative so our
differences are celebrated and we are equally respected
and valued regardless of our differences? We should be
free to pursue whatever activity we feel like doing in
any phase of our cycle. We should not be making
choices as a reaction to the cultural conditioning that
dictates we must never acknowledge our hormonal
fluctuations for fear of being considered weak. There’s
a big difference between forcing yourself to work out
—pushing yourself to ignore your biological rhythms
—and gaining strength from your workouts by syncing
with your biological rhythms. When you take a cyclical
approach to exercise, you can “just do it” when it
works best for you.
When you sync your activities with the fluctuations of
your hormonal cycle, you support your biological systems,
energize your body, fire up healthy metabolism, boost your
moods, shore up overall health, and prevent injury and
boredom. Want more details? No sweat—check out the handy
guide of phase-specific exercises below. And if you want your
fitness routine to honor your 24-hour clock, too, try exercising
in the morning during the first half of your cycle and in the
afternoon during the second half of your cycle—if that routine
would fit your schedule and feel right for you.
Getting in the FLO with Your Workouts
Follicular phase: In the first few days after your bleed has
finished, your energy begins to rise again, so this is the
time to wake up your body with some fun cardio. And
because you are more open to new experiences during this
phase, mix up your old routine with a new class. As your
follicular phase continues, your body will react more
efficiently to hardcore workouts to boost metabolism, help
you shed weight, and build lean muscle. However, if your
hormones are imbalanced or you’re trying to lose weight
or struggling with anxiety, fatigue, or depression, you must
keep your workouts to no more than thirty minutes. Going
beyond half an hour will overstress your body and push it
into fat storage mode.
Workout suggestions: running, biking, dance, hiking,
jumping rope
Ovulatory phase: In this phase, estrogen and testosterone are
at peak levels, giving you energy to burn. This is the time
for you to crush an intense workout and to choose group
workouts that feed your desire to be more social.
Workout suggestions: interval sprints, HIIT, indoor
cycling, boot camp, kickboxing
Luteal phase: During the first five days of the luteal phase,
you still have elevated estrogen and testosterone levels,
and progesterone enters the picture. You’ll still have a
good dose of energy, but not as much for high-impact
activities. Use this energy to maximize lean muscle gains
by focusing on any kind of strength training. Once you hit
the second half of the luteal phase, all three of your
reproductive hormones begin to diminish in concentration,
shifting you out of muscle-building mode. To align with
this phase, switch to workouts that focus on flexibility.
Workout suggestions: first half of the luteal phase:
strength training, intense yoga; second half of the luteal
phase: Pilates, barre, gentle yoga
Menstrual phase: While you’re bleeding, your hormone
levels are at their lowest, and so are your energy levels.
Any form of high-intensity exercise during this phase will
backfire by turning on fat storage, causing muscle wasting
and putting stress on your cardiovascular system. Engage
in activities that feel restorative to you. Don’t forget that
deep, restful, uninterrupted sleep helps with weight loss, so
focus on getting some good shut-eye. It’s completely okay
to consider napping a workout on these days!
Workout suggestions: walking, foam rolling, yin
yoga, mat Pilates, breath work, napping (really!). Quick tip
for cramps: yoga can help. The Woman’s Yoga Book:
Asana and Pranayama for All Phases of the Menstrual
Cycle, a beautiful book by Bobby Clennell, suggests
triangle pose, standing forward bend, downward dog, and
fish pose (sitting cross legged and leaning back on a block
so your back is arched) to calm cramps.
The Cycle Syncing Method™: Fitness FLO*
This chart offers suggestions for weekly workouts, but it can be tailored to your
individual fitness level, phase timing, and hormonal reality. If you’re fit and
hormonally healthy, you may want to work out every day, but if you’re in the
process of rebalancing your hormones, it’s better to start with just three days a
week. And remember, the phases flow gradually from one to the next, so there may
be some overlap. For example, the ovulatory phase typically lasts three to four
days, but you may still have an abundance of energy in the few days immediately
following, so go ahead and enjoy a few more intense workouts. And each phase
isn’t exactly one week long, but this plan can help you move through your cycle
smoothly. The best advice is to listen to your body and go with what makes you feel
good.
Follicular Ovulatory Luteal Menstrual
Monday Cardio Kettlebells HIIT Rest
dance
Tuesday Rebounding HIIT Pilates Rest
class
Wednesday Dance class Indoor Weight Yin yoga
cycling lifting
Thursday Jumping Boot camp Pilates Walking
rope class
Friday Indoor Kickboxing Barre Mat
cycling class Pilates
Saturday Hiking Power yoga Yoga Walking
Sunday Rest Rest Rest Rest
To help you keep track of which phase you’re in and which
workouts are best for your current phase, try the MyFLO app
(www.MyFLOtracker.com). The app makes it super simple to
sync your fitness activities with your cycle, so you’re always
getting the most out of your workouts—and you can learn
more about workout videos tailored to each phase of your
cycle at www.cyclesyncingmembership.com/bonus.
GO FOR THE GOLD
The US women’s soccer team players follow the
unique timing of their individual cycles to map out the
most effective training and resting schedule, as well as
a dietary approach to maximize their energy and
recovery.
Four Steps to Get in Sync with Your
Workouts
Making the shift from feeling you need to “go hard or go
home” every day, to accepting that you can do less and allow
your body to guide your workout intensity levels, can be
deeply triggering to our fears about our bodies being out of our
control. To help transition to a more cyclical mindset and to
keep from reverting back to your old conditioning, try this
four-step approach.
1. Note where you are in your cycle. Understanding how
your hormonal fluctuations impact your performance will
allow you to make smarter decisions about your fitness
routines. If you’ve tried to power through a boot camp
class during your monthly bleed, and it left you feeling
fatigued, you’ll know for yourself that you need to switch
to a more restorative activity during that phase. I have
found noticing where you are in your cycle to be one of
the most empowering and liberating pieces of syncing
with your second clock. You’ll understand why you can
zoom through dance class one week but feel like you’re
dragging another week. And you’ll stop beating yourself
up when you’re dragging. You’re not a slacker; you’re
just doing the wrong workout for your biochemistry at the
wrong time! By educating yourself about your body’s
unique cyclical nature and how it affects your
performance, you can avoid the frustration and hurtful
inner dialog that can be so misery-making. You can track
your progress with the MyFLO app so you feel good
about yourself every day and achieve lasting results—no
pain required!
2. Have an exit plan. If you’re healing your hormones and
need to limit your workouts to thirty minutes, but you’re
taking a class that’s an hour long or you’re meeting up
with friends for a hike, craft an exit plan before you start.
Many of us are so conditioned to follow along, be polite,
and avoid rocking the boat that we’ll risk injuring
ourselves or harming our hormonal health by overdoing it
rather than leaving halfway through a class. Use this
strategy: Tell the instructor beforehand that you need to
bow out early, so she is prepared to see you leave before
the class is over. And find a spot at the back of the room
where you can make a quick exit without disrupting the
class. If you’re going out with your workout buddies,
give them a heads-up that you’ll have to peel away after
thirty minutes. Let them know you’re in the process of
healing your hormones. You’ll be delightfully surprised at
what opens up in the conversation among your friends
when you talk about your hormones. This should be a
matter-of-fact conversation women can easily have
together. Just as we’d mention needing to make choices
based on the weather, we should mention needing to
make choices based on our biological rhythms without
feeling any shame.
3. Be flexible. Are you in the first half of your cycle but feel
like taking it easy with a gentle stretching class? That’s
100 percent okay! You can always take it down a notch if
you feel like it. Your hormonal cycle is fluid, which
allows you to take some flexibility with your fitness
routines. But what if you’re in the second half of your
cycle and have a burning desire to lace up your running
shoes and hit the road for some hardcore sprints? You
may want to give it a try to see how your body reacts.
I’ve been following this cyclical program for close to two
decades now, and I still like to experiment to see how my
body responds. Recently, while I was in the early stage of
the luteal phase, I got a strong urge to do some interval
jogging. Keep in mind, I don’t run often as it’s not an
ideal workout for me, but this desire was so intense I
decided to give it a go. I cruised around the loop in the
park, alternating between walking for a few minutes and
ratcheting up the speed to a full jog for a minute. The first
two times I did this workout right after my ovulatory
phase, I felt fantastic. But when I did it a third time on the
fifth day of my luteal phase, I felt drained. When I got
home, I hit the couch, and it took me until the next day to
recover my energy. It was a powerful reminder that even
though an activity made me feel energized a few days
earlier, I needed to honor my cycle and skip the high-
intensity interval training that late in the second half of
my cycle. The science is the science: I can’t get away
with going against my biochemistry.
4. After your workout, ask yourself how you feel. Do you
feel energized and awesome? Do you feel drained and
depleted? Examining your body’s response to exercise
will give you invaluable insight into what your
biochemistry needs to thrive. For example, if you feel
exhausted, and it takes you hours to recover your mood
and energy, it’s a clear sign you may be overexercising.
You may have used up your adrenal and glucose reserves,
pushing your body into survival and fat storage mode.
Without judgment, make a mental note of this outcome,
and don’t go quite so hard next time. Remember, the goal
is to feel good after you exercise.
THIS ALL SOUNDS GREAT, BUT . . .
“I don’t want to get bulky.” Why should you care
about strength training? Lean muscle—the kind
that makes you look toned and defined, not big and
bulky—is a key element in your body’s
metabolism. The more lean muscle on your bones,
the faster your body burns calories and fat.
Research shows that starting at about age thirty,
you begin to lose muscle mass each year. And
unless you actively engage in strength training to
counteract this, that lean muscle is often replaced
by fat, which kicks out estrogen, increasing your
risk for estrogen dominance. More lean muscle and
less fat can put the brakes on excess estrogen
production.
“Stretching is a waste of time.” Taking the time to
stretch can be very beneficial in helping you reach
your fitness—and weight—goals. Stretching
primes your muscles for your workouts so you can
perform better, prevents injury, soothes stress to
reduce cortisol levels, and even helps you sleep
better (and sleep is critical for balancing your
body’s hunger and satiety hormones!).
“Taking a day off is lazy or throws me off.” After
intense workouts and during certain times of your
cycle, your body needs rest so it can recover. If
you’re caught up in perpetual productivity mode
and continually work out without a break, you
could stall or completely derail your progress. You
need to listen to your body when it tells you to push
harder and also respect it when it asks for some rest
and recovery.
Let’s Talk Our Way into a New Normal
Earlier in this chapter, I told you about triathlete Meredith
Kessler, who had the courage to share her story about her
missing periods. I applaud her for going public with her
experiences and am thrilled with the growing number of
professional athletes who are talking about their periods on
Twitter and in the media. British pro tennis player Heather
Watson attributed a loss at the Australian Open to low energy
levels during her period and told the press, “I have nightmares
about getting my period at Wimbledon.” Olympic gymnast
Aly Raisman has spoken openly about her struggles with her
cycle and told Allure, “You can’t tell the judges you want to
compete tomorrow or wait a few days.” The gymnast, who
bravely spoke up about being sexually abused by former USA
Gymnastics physician Larry Nassar, is encouraging women to
stop feeling uncomfortable or ashamed of our periods and to
start talking about them. I couldn’t agree more. I think
everybody involved in the fitness industry and in high school,
college, and professional sports should be talking about
periods. Professional coaches, personal trainers, and fitness
instructors should make allowances for women’s cycles. How
great would it be if your personal trainer knew you were on
Day 1 of your bleed and scaled back your workout to focus
more on stretching and flexibility rather than pushing you to
run sprints in between heavy lifting when you’re already
feeling blah? Imagine the day when group exercise instructors
make an announcement at the beginning of an hour-long class
that any women in the second half of their cycle should feel
comfortable staying at the back of the class and leaving early
after thirty minutes. Wouldn’t you love to go to a yoga studio
that offers classes based on the phases of the cycle? And
please, can coaches finally stop overtraining women to the
point that their periods go MIA? This practice is harming our
biochemistry as a direct consequence of ignoring our second
clock.
I understand that at the professional level, athletes may not
be able to reschedule their tournaments to sync with their
cycle, but you can do so in your everyday life. That said,
syncing with your cycle doesn’t mean that being on your
period should be an excuse to avoid engaging in physical
activity. Instead, syncing with your cycle will make your
period easier—you’ll have fewer cramps, less fatigue, and
more energy—so you’ll have more “get up and go” to enjoy
your favorite activities.
Losing the Postpartum Baby Weight and
Breastfeeding
After we give birth, we feel intense pressure to get our
bodies back into sexy pre-pregnancy shape and to bounce
back to our former selves without a hitch. But as
Kimberly Ann Johnson wrote in her book, The Fourth
Trimester, it takes time to recover from the life-altering
physical changes while also adjusting to the significant
emotional, neurological, and relational upheaval that birth
brings. This is an extremely important time to recover
from pregnancy and birth by nourishing and resting the
body. We need to treat the twelve weeks after birth like an
extended menstrual phase and support it with nutrient-
dense foods, such as bone broth, homemade chicken liver
paté, and bison burgers. You can find some amazing
postpartum recipes in Heng Ou’s book, The First Forty
Days. This phase also requires lots of rest with some
gentle movement sprinkled in—think easy walking,
soothing yoga, and Pilates geared to helping realign your
bones and muscles.
In the first year after I gave birth to my daughter I
basically took a break from exercise. I went for a walk—
more of a stroll, actually, not a power walk!—three or
four times a week in the park pushing my baby in her
thirty-pound stroller. And I worked with a postpartum
physical therapist at home. And I didn’t do anything for
more than thirty minutes. And guess what? I lost forty
pounds in six months without feeling deprived and
without wearing myself out with intense exercise. I was
able to lose the weight because I was tuned in to my
second clock and honored my hormonal reality during
this postpartum stage of my life. Our cultural
conditioning tells us that after giving birth we ought to
diet and work out to drop the baby weight. But that’s bad
advice. We need to respect our body’s biochemical needs.
I needed to make sure I was consuming enough calories
to handle the energy- and nutrient-heavy process of
producing breast milk for my baby. My body was healing
from the massive nutrient requirements that accompany
pregnancy and the delivery of a tiny human. Like all new
moms, I was sleep-deprived and needed to get rest
whenever I could. I listened to my inner guidance system
and understood that if I wanted to provide for my child
and keep myself healthy and happy, I needed to support
and nourish my body.
Many women think the calorie-burning magic of
breastfeeding is the key to getting your prebaby body
back. While women who breastfeed exclusively for three
months lose over three pounds more than women who use
alternative feeding methods, according to a 2014 study in
Preventive Medicine, I’ve had many clients tell me they
have actually gained weight while breastfeeding. I
usually ask them what they’re eating and how much
they’re exercising. In most cases, they’re not eating
enough and they’re exercising too much, a combination
that stalls metabolism. The American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists recommends consuming
450 to 500 extra calories a day to make up for energy
expended on milk production.
If you don’t listen to your body and try to lose the
baby weight by going on some low-calorie diet and
heading straight to boot camp, your body will fight back
by going into fat storage mode. Pushing yourself too hard
also depletes your stores of nutrients, energy, and
hormones and can lead to adrenal fatigue or thyroid
issues that can linger for years. This is one of the most
critical times in your life, when you absolutely must work
with your body to give it the rest and nourishment it
needs.
Your Body Is the Boss
This chapter has given you a framework to help you choose
workouts that sync with your cycle, but the framework isn’t
intended to be restrictive or prevent you from doing what you
love. Ultimately, syncing your exercise with your cycle is
about experimenting to find what feels good for you. You’re
the one who’s living inside your body; only you know what
feels right and what doesn’t. Work on fine-tuning your sense
of self-awareness, so you can hear your body’s inner voice
communicating with you through sensations and feelings, and
make adjustments accordingly. There is no right or wrong—
simply what your body needs in the moment. Listening to your
body, you regain the power nature instilled in you.
Chapter 6
Your Blueprint to Do More
with Less Stress
For most people, creativity is a serious business. They
forget the telling phrase “the play of ideas” and think
that they need to knuckle down and work more. Often,
the reverse is true. They need to play.
—JULIA CAMERON
A
s a young girl, I naturally gravitated to all things creative—I
loved to dance, sang in choir, played piano, sewed some of my
own clothes, and even made jewelry. But around age fifteen, right
about the time when puberty should have been kicking in, I
abandoned my artistic side and disconnected from the feminine
energy it nurtured. I thought if I was going to be successful in this
world, I needed to leave my creative hobbies behind and get
serious. Nobody had ever directly told me that dancing or making
jewelry was frivolous, but those ideas had somehow seeped into
my unconscious mind and reflected my interpretation of our
cultural values: I believed that I had to finish all of my work
before I could play, and that the path for success in life seemed to
require continuous pushing; I grew up in a home that valued
productivity. So all of my creative pursuits and the desire to
explore my interests didn’t seem to fit into the things I was
observing about how to be an adult. I began to work more, play
less, and rest less. I abandoned the rest, play, grow, learn/work
pattern of childhood (which, interestingly, is a nice balance of
feminine and masculine energies). We all go through this shift in
our own way: we begin to over-rely on our masculine energy of
constant doing, we develop anxiety around fallow time, and we
become experts in ignoring the body’s cries for rest, nourishment,
and pleasure. I shifted my focus to the things I thought would put
me on the fast track to the traditional concept of success—a big
job, a big salary, a big house. In high school, I loaded up my
schedule with AP classes and clubs. I started working in the
summers for different businesses, small at first, then larger and
more corporate as I went from high school to college. I thought
this approach would help me get a head start in my career. I didn’t
realize that all the pressure I was putting on myself to constantly
push as hard as I could was exacerbating my hormonal issues, long
before I eventually got diagnosed with PCOS. Not only did I not
have time for my creative pursuits, but I also found myself
increasingly anxious and overwhelmed, and I developed a habit of
procrastinating to unofficially give myself a break and then
rushing at all hours of the night to meet deadlines. This was
exhausting, and I was miserable. Things on my to-do list were
falling through the cracks, and I felt like I was floundering. I
hadn’t been diagnosed with PCOS yet, so I didn’t know why I felt
so bad all the time. This feeling that I needed to continually push
myself carried over into my career, until I finally began actively
searching for ways to gain control of my life, feel better, reclaim
that creativity I had abandoned, and have more energy for the
things I wanted to do.
Jocelyn, 29, knows what it’s like to feel drained. She was
experiencing bad PMS—cramps, breast tenderness, full-body
bloating, feelings of despair, and fatigue to the point that she
couldn’t work. She felt that her body was failing her. She had
energy for only seven days out of the month and didn’t feel like
she could accomplish anything. Syncing with her cycle turned that
situation around and helped her regain her energy. She began to re-
identify what gave her pleasure, and instead of listening to other
people’s plans and feelings, she started tuning in to her own. “It
totally turned my life around,” she says. “The cramps are gone, the
clots are gone, and I have energy all through the month. Even
when I’m bleeding, I have energy. I don’t have to stop and check
out.”
The Time Management Myth
I thought learning time management would be the key to making
everything better. I convinced the people at one of my summer
jobs to send me to a conference on time management. It turned out
this wildly popular program involved using an elaborate time
management planner that was very repetitive—the same habits
every day that ensure you can meet your daily appointments by the
hour, lists of tasks, and so on. I was so excited about it, and started
filling in my to-do list, but as much as I tried, I just couldn’t stick
with it. There was also no real structure or guidance around self-
care—just that one should do it daily. Each day, I would start with
the best of intentions, attempting to accomplish all I had planned
out the night or week before, but instead of feeling like I was
breezing through my to-do list, and feeling less stress and more
satisfaction and confidence, I felt worse about myself than before!
And when I planned activities a couple weeks in advance, by the
time I got to that day in my schedule, my to-dos were absolutely
not what I felt like doing. What I thought I wanted to focus on two
weeks earlier now felt stifling and wrong for my frame of mind.
For example, I would plan to finish a project, to do a group fitness
class, or to go out with friends on a certain day, but when that day
arrived my head was in a completely different space, so I didn’t
follow through. I began to feel I couldn’t stick to my plans and
commitments. Within a few months, I tossed the planner aside,
telling myself, “I can’t do this. I’m a huge failure. I’ll just never be
able to manage my time.” I even stopped wearing a watch. I
literally broke up with time.
Finding My Feminine Energy
By my midtwenties, when I was finalizing my research on what
would become the FLO protocol, I was still struggling with trying
to manage everything I wanted to do in life and preserving the
hormonal health I had recently fought hard to recover. Something
key was missing. I had an unexpected source of inspiration to
guide me to ask the right question that eventually led me to create
the Cycle Syncing Method™. A group of girlfriends and I had
decided to travel to India to visit a female zen master, because she
was the only one we could find who was a woman. We stayed
nearby at an ashram and got to participate in various meditation
classes that were so different from all the meditation I had
experienced before. These classes were all movement-based. This
practice of reaching higher states of conscious awareness through
engaging the body, not ignoring it, countered every bit of
conditioning I had ever received. I became aware of a whole new
perspective on feminine and masculine energy, and that’s when I
realized the key that was missing. Instead of trying to fit my body
and its biological rhythms into a paradigm clearly suited to male
physiology, I needed to create a paradigm that included my
physiology at the center. I realized there must have been a
connection between that decision I made to abandon my creative
expression at puberty and my body’s blocked ability to perform its
own version of creative expression—having a functioning cycle.
By buying into our cultural conditioning, which says that relying
on our masculine energy is the path to success, I had
unconsciously disconnected from my feminine energy. Dr.
Christiane Northrup writes in her book Women’s Bodies, Women’s
Wisdom about the many ways women divorce themselves from
their feminine energy, whether it’s as a result of cultural
conditioning or an abusive relationship that makes you turn it off,
and how this manifests in our bodies in conditions like PCOS and
fibroids (more on this in the Biohacking Tool Kit). Many of us
have some version of my story of shutting down our feminine
energy to try to survive in a culture that devalues such energy.
When I returned from India, I felt like I had awakened to a
larger truth about life, and I realized I wanted to create a practice
that would do more than just keep my hormones balanced. I asked
myself a new question. My old question was always something
like, “How can I do more to achieve happiness and success?” The
new question was radically different: “What does it look like to
live as an embodied woman, connected to my inner wisdom and
creativity?” I wanted to heal from the wounds of our patriarchal
conditioning in every way—physically, emotionally, and
spiritually—so I could live with a better balance between my
feminine and masculine energy. And then something clicked: I had
only to look to my menstrual cycle for the perfect road map for my
new vision for success. My biological rhythmic pattern laid out the
ideal way to support my whole life—not only by taking care of my
physical body with nutrition and exercise that supported the phases
of my cycle, but also by adopting a phase-specific approach to my
everyday activities that fueled my feminine energy and creativity.
My goal wasn’t to be able to get more stuff done so I could chase
the masculine ideal of success. My goal went much deeper. I
wanted to feel satisfied each day and not have to wait until I did or
achieved something to feel successful. I wanted to be in a more
consistent state of flow.
So when I began my own cyclical journey, I started tracking
how I was feeling each day—how the foods I ate, the exercises I
did, and the way I scheduled my days affected my moods, energy
levels, and sense of satisfaction. And more important, how this
new approach to my life strengthened my connection to my
feminine energy. I experimented until I created the Cycle Syncing
Method™, the principles of which are detailed in this book. At
first, I noticed the weight loss and regulated periods—encouraging
milestones that let me know the first three steps of the FLO
protocol, outlined in WomanCode, were working. Then I began
tuning in to more subtle things—feeling more energized
throughout the day, getting into a state of flow on a more regular
basis, hearing my inner guidance system and heeding its intuitive
messages. The more I honored my feminine energy, the more
enthused I was to take on the projects I was interested in and the
more fulfilled I felt. I also regained confidence in stopping,
resting, and making space as a safe and necessary part of the
creative process. After syncing with my cycle for a few months,
my health, my body, my moods, and my energy levels had all
transformed. I used to feel like I was grinding away, just trying to
check things off my to-do list to feel a little relief. Now, I woke up
feeling excited about what the day would bring, and I found
myself more often in the right place at the right time, ready to
receive opportunity and abundance. I also noticed that instead of
continuously draining my energy “bank account” and feeling
exhausted in the second half of my cycle, I was adding to the
account daily to offset any natural dips in energy that are a healthy
part of the cycle. With this feminine-based energy practice, you’re
always connecting to your body and inner wisdom rather than
obsessing on what you think you should be doing. It’s a big shift in
your mindset, but you’ll know you’re doing it right when you get
off the hamster wheel of doing and start feeling connected to your
body and desires.
FEMININE AND MASCULINE ENERGY
Both men and women have both feminine and masculine
energy. Both forms of energy are good, and you have to
find your own balance. However, engaging one exclusively
can lead to burnout.
Masculine Energy Feminine Energy
linear cyclical
goal-oriented process-oriented
competitive collaborative
static flexible
The Value of Rest
In the beginning, I was more comfortable doing all the active parts
of syncing with my cycle because I have more of that dominant
masculine energy, as many of us do: navigating within a
patriarchal environment causes many of us to rely more on our
linear masculine energy of continuous doing and pushing. So when
I first came to the Cycle Syncing Method™ as a way to heal this
imbalance in my energies (among other things), I noticed that what
felt easier to do first was the doing part, and what was more
challenging was the not doing. When I’m in my menstrual phase,
I’m not doing a lot of things that my outward self of the first half
of the cycle (the follicular and the ovulatory) would love to be
doing. I was, of course, under the impression that I should be
doing every day. It’s the gift of the luteal and menstrual phases,
when you align with and let yourself be guided by the energies of
those phases, to heal you from this toxic concept that you must
have the same “doing,” masculine energy every day. It lets you
have some healing for your feminine aspect of the give-and-take,
the resting and the receiving. The dynamic in the masculine is
binary (on or off), and in the feminine it’s additive (cyclical).
There is tremendous value in committing to the practice of
going inward, of connecting to your feminine energy, of doing
less, of observing that you’re okay and that things are not going to
fall apart—and doing this over and over again, every month. For
me, it has provided tremendous rebalancing. I am a first-
generation citizen, and anyone who shares this experience knows
that immigrant families share a culture of constant work. In
addition, like most of us, I had no perspective on feminine energy.
I was, as the only female child, surrounded by brothers and male
cousins, and the women in my family, like women everywhere,
were all very wounded by the patriarchy, too.
There was no modeling for me of what it looked like to be an
embodied woman or integrated with my feminine energy. I used
the Cycle Syncing Method™ as a healing practice for this
psychospiritual wound that we all receive as women in this
unbalanced environment, and to unhook from the conditioning that
our value is based on what we do. I’ve been able to prove that
resting and taking care of myself, slowing down, being authentic
with my emotions, and including my needs is the key. It’s
cleansing and it’s healing, and I look forward to it now—but it
took me many, many repetitions of working with the ritual of my
cycle to really integrate these energies.
Managing Your Life
In this chapter, we’re going to look at your relationship to time,
energy, creativity, and productivity. If you’re like most women,
you probably assume this will be directed specifically at your work
life (chapter 7 is devoted to work); but because syncing with your
cycle is about managing your energy versus managing your time, it
extends into your relationships, parenting, home life, social life,
and more. When you’re managing your schedule effectively, you
stop feeling drained by all that you do, freeing up space that allows
you to flourish creatively in a natural, organic way in every area of
your life.
First, we’ll explore the negative effects of our culture’s
frantically flawed pace and master a more intuitive way of
planning and scheduling. Then, we will focus on how you can take
advantage of your cyclical strengths to create a more sustainable,
fulfilling life. My hope is that by the end of the chapter, you’ll see
that the secret to success is not figuring out how to do it all—
rather, it’s about defining your own success and focusing your
energy on the things that matter most to you at the right time,
feeling good throughout the day, and continuously building energy
rather than draining it.
The Cost of an Energy Leak
We live in a culture that encourages us to push continuously. To
keep up with the demands, we try to extend our energy and
increase our focus by exogenous means—think double espressos
and energy drinks. But the fact is, creating more energy is an
inside game, won by supporting our biological rhythms. It’s
similar to saving money—you’ll have more money if you spend
less of it. Likewise, you’ll have more energy if you’re thoughtful
about where you’re letting it go. Where is your energy leaking? Is
it due to the foods you eat? A lack of movement? Not getting
enough rest? Not setting up healthy boundaries at work and in
relationships?
It’s a fact that you can’t create more time, but you can create
more energy by plugging the leaks.
Because we’ve been so conditioned, however, it can be hard to
let go of the feeling that we should be in perpetual go-mode. I say,
listen to the science. A wealth of research has proven pretty
definitively that pushing too hard for long periods of time actually
diminishes your productivity and creativity and sets you up for
burnout. The grind is real. In May 2019 the World Health
Organization (WHO) officially recognized burnout as a legitimate
health diagnosis.
So, let’s go back to the big energy leaks in your life. You can
see now that these energy leaks can impact your productivity and
creativity, but did you know that they can also take a toll on your
body’s biological systems, creating a negative biofeedback loop
and more deeply draining your energy? Take a look at how trying
to operate as if you only have the one 24-hour clock ravages your
biological systems and disrupts your 28-day clock.
IDENTIFY YOUR ENERGY LEAKS
Where is your energy leaking? Our energy gets drained
when we are unconscious about all the little ways we
compromise what we need in order to be in our peak flow
state. Over time, this accumulates not only into mental
overwhelm, but also into measurable stress and
inflammation in the body. Check off all that apply to you
on a regular basis:
not getting enough rest
skipping exercise
skipping meals or not eating nutrient-dense foods
not maintaining boundaries, or saying yes when you mean no
not asking for help, and doing too much
not managing your money and feeling stressed about it
Evaluate where your energy and time are going, and plug
those holes!
The Productivity Toll on Your Biological Systems
Biological System 1: Brain. Chronic stress can lead to long-
term changes in the brain that affect cognitive function,
including changes in memory, learning, and mental
health. For example, did you know that stress shrinks the
brain? Researchers at Yale University found that stress
reduces gray matter volume in key areas of the prefrontal
cortex and limbic regions, areas involved in emotional
stability, impulse control, and reward regulation. In a
2012 study in Biological Psychiatry, these researchers
suggested that brain shrinkage in these areas may increase
the risk of depression and addiction, among other mental
health issues. How are you supposed to perform your best
when your brain isn’t operating at optimal levels? Chronic
stress also alters the way neural stem cells develop in the
hippocampus, a region associated with memory and
learning, according to a 2014 study in Molecular
Psychiatry. These cells typically develop into neurons, but
under chronic stress these cells instead transform into a
protective coating called myelin. The excess myelin
growth disrupts the timing and communication of neural
networks and could increase the risk for depression,
anxiety, and other mental disorders. When you’re feeling
anxious or depressed, it’s hard to feel focused or
enthusiastic about your to-do list. With unrelenting stress,
you may also have trouble concentrating, making a
decision, or keeping things organized. And since your
brain is critically involved in supervising your body’s
hormone production, too much stress can increase
production of the stress hormone cortisol, which has the
effect of suppressing progesterone production, which can
lead to more severe PMS symptoms and other period
problems (more on this in chapter 7).
Biological System 2: Immune system. Stress can take a toll
on your immune system, leaving you more vulnerable to
routine colds and flu bugs, as well as flare-ups like itchy
skin, rashes, hives, acne, or cold sores that can distract
you and get in the way of your creative flow. When
you’re regularly fighting a cold or flu or dealing with
symptoms, you can’t possibly feel up to the task of
running errands, attending meetings, or working on your
side hustle. When your immune system is constantly
under attack, it can also lead to systemic inflammation,
which has been linked to painful cramps and PMS. In
2016, researchers reported in the Journal of Women’s
Health that women with elevated levels of the
inflammation biomarker CRP had up to a 41 percent
increased risk for PMS symptoms, such as cramps,
bloating, and breast tenderness.
Biological System 3: Metabolism. When you get stuck in
perpetual work mode, your metabolism goes haywire and
you’re more likely to gain weight. We all know that when
we’re feeling stressed, we’re more likely to reach for
some chocolate, cookies, or ice cream. The biological
mechanism behind this tendency is the rise in cortisol,
which ramps up insulin levels and can cause blood sugar
levels to drop. When blood sugar levels drop, cravings for
sugary, fat-laden fare increase. A 2017 study in the
journal Obesity involving 2,527 women and men showed
that having chronically elevated cortisol levels was
associated with higher weight, larger waist circumference,
and a great risk for obesity. As you’ve seen, fat cells also
secrete estrogen, so being obese can contribute to
estrogen dominance, which can then increase PMS
symptoms and lead to heavier bleeding. Every woman
who’s had to deal with heavy periods knows that this
doesn’t leave you in the most energized creative space.
Low blood sugar can also make you feel nervous,
anxious, irritable, impatient, or confused, among other
things. These feelings can also sabotage your interactions
with friends and family, colleagues, and the innocent
person in front of you in the checkout line.
Biological System 4: Microbiome. Feeling stressed from
nonstop productivity? The stress might make you queasy,
give you heartburn, cause ulcers, or give you an
embarrassing bout of diarrhea. The consequences of
chronic stress go even deeper. A 2010 study showed that
after subjecting mice to ten days of stress, their gut
microbiome became significantly less diverse when
compared with whiskered critters that didn’t undergo
stress. When you’re under stress, hormonal changes
disrupt your gut microbiome and cause it to become
unstable and behave erratically, according to 2017
research in Nature Microbiology. This instability may
increase your vulnerability to mood disorders, irritable
bowel disease, obesity, and type 2 diabetes. Other
researchers suggest that a healthy microbiome is
associated with mental toughness; compromised gut
health could add to difficulties coping with everyday
challenges at the office or in your personal life. A
stressed-out and compromised microbiome can also
disrupt your 28-day clock by causing excess estrogen,
which can leave you foggy-headed, tired, bloated, and
depressed, and completely derail your creative process.
Biological System 5: Stress response. When a crazy
schedule, big demands at work, and self-induced pressure
to perform don’t subside, your stress response works
overtime just as you do. Eventually your stress response
gets stuck in high alert mode, and you feel as if you’re
under threat at all times. As a result, your adrenal glands
can become overtaxed, leading to adrenal fatigue, which
makes it harder to function at your best and can stop
ovulation, decrease fertility, and lower libido.
There’s got to be a better way—right?
Stop Managing Your Time and Start
Managing Your Energy
Are you struggling to stay on top of everything—multitasking to
the max, juggling multiple schedules, finding time for family,
squeezing in a social life—and feeling stretched to the limit? If so,
you’re probably (and rightfully) frustrated. And being the
proactive woman that you are, you’ve probably set out to try and
solve the situation. Maybe you’ve downloaded a few different to-
do list apps. Maybe you bought a planner that promised to keep
you organized and focused. Maybe you turned to an inspiring daily
journal. Or maybe you went to a time management seminar as I
did. Like me, you were probably hoping your efforts would help
you gain control of your life. But none of those apps or planners
did the trick—and I have to tell you, they never will. Why?
Because traditional time management tools don’t work for women
who have the 28-day hormonal clock running. With most time
management systems, we’re expected to make to-do lists, check
things off as the day goes by, and then wake up the next day and
do it all over again. Every day, every 24 hours, the same thing.
Rinse. Repeat.
When I finally got in sync with my own biochemistry, I
realized I never actually had a problem with time or time
management. I understood that those linear planning tools
correspond with the 24-hour clock. And they didn’t work with my
cyclical nature. Don’t get me wrong—they’re magnificent tools for
anyone who’s operating solely on a daily circadian clock. But they
aren’t suited to the pattern changes of the female hormonal cycle
or the concept of right-timing. When we schedule our lives
without taking our natural 28-day hormone clock into account, we
don’t get to access the gifts provided by our cyclical nature, and
we experience constant energy drains. I needed to stop managing
my time and start managing my energy in a way that aligned with
both my 24-hour and my 28-day clock. As you saw in chapter 2,
this subtle but powerful shift in your mindset gets you off that
endless treadmill of tasks and onto a path to achieving more of the
things that are important to you while seemingly doing less.
The Cycle Syncing Method™ is working for Larissa. When this
graphic designer started managing her energy according to the
phases of her cycle rather than simply scheduling her time, she
said, “It felt like the fog lifted.” Even though she has been syncing
with her cycle for some time, she occasionally finds herself getting
sucked back into thinking, “I wasn’t productive enough this
week.” When she flips the script and honors her cycle by saying
no to certain things or taking a step back during her menstrual
phase, for example, she experiences a real payoff. “I find that the
next week, I’m just unstoppable and it’s effortless,” she says. “The
things on my to-do list are just bam, bam, bam, done, versus
forcing and trying to push and trying to make it happen all the
time.”
Self-help guru Tony Robbins has helped millions of people,
including me, learn how to trigger a flow state that puts you in
peak performance mode. He points out that a major stumbling
block to achieving a flow state is the disconnect that occurs when
your core beliefs and expectations for your life don’t match with
your reality. If you believe what our culture has told you, that you
should be able to perform nonstop and ignore your biology, you’re
going to suffer. Robbins explains you need to change your inner
blueprint to match your reality so you can enjoy your life and
optimize your performance. Among his many teachings, he wants
you to identify what motivates you, establish daily physical habits
that prime you for achievement, let go of your fears, and take
massive daily action in the direction of your dreams. I believe that
for women a critical key to unleashing our inner power comes
from patterning our creativity and productivity according to our
hormonal biological rhythms—a practice that leads to a fulfilling
and sustainable life.
When you stop thinking about time management and start
managing your energy according to your cycle phases, you’re
going to reduce stress, support your biological systems, optimize
communication, build energy reserves, and enjoy sustainable
productivity. Everything in your life will start to feel easier, and
you’ll accomplish more of what you want to do with less effort
and stress. Letting science and the principles of this cyclical
program be your guide, you will decrease multitasking, increase
your focus on the projects you care most about, and take more
restorative breaks, and the payoff will be keeping end-of-day
exhaustion at bay, a more positive mood, and fired-up creativity.
And what about that natural pattern of creation—initiation,
growth, completion, and rest—detailed in chapter 2? You will
realize you have this same pattern reflected in your hormonal
cycle. By nurturing each of these phases, you will unlock the
creative matrix within. I’m not necessarily referring to the
traditional sense of creativity—dancing, playing piano, or jewelry
making—but rather the sense that you can bring to life the big
ideas, projects, and plans you dream about. You’ll be able to
optimize your creative output according to the predictable nature
of your cyclical patterns (when your hormones are balanced).
Following this rhythm will be so deeply nourishing, you will never
fall into an energy hole and will no longer feel disconnected from
your creative force. For me, a woman who had made a conscious
decision to disconnect from my inner creativity at a young age,
cycle syncing opened the door to tap into that creative matrix to
bring more of what I wanted into my life. Valuing my creative
process over mere productivity ended up making me more
productive and less stressed!
Choosing to Feel Good
I used to be someone who struggled with decision-making. I
would be stuck in my head, arguing back and forth, generating
pros and cons lists, and never getting anywhere. I would drive
myself and my friends crazy asking for their thoughts. I’m sure
you’ve had conversations like this where you don’t get anywhere,
instead agonizing over any decision—whether it’s staying in a
relationship or buying a new pair of shoes. I really struggled with
knowing how to know what felt right for me, and it wasn’t until I
really committed to the Cycle Syncing Method™ that I was able to
engage a different process to make decisions.
I now had the opportunity, for example, to reconsider attending
an event. Every time I thought about going to this event, I had
opposing thoughts about what I might miss out on by not going,
and what I might not be able to get done on my own agenda if I
went. So I checked in with my body and how it felt while
envisioning the activity. The whole process of traveling to and
attending this event felt tight and stressful in my body. Then when
I leaned in to feeling my body doing the things on my project list
for that same time period, I felt centered and grounded. When I do
this process of asking my body, I’m always reminded that my
thoughts and emotions will always be multifold, but my body
holds a clarity and certainty that allows me to make a decision
with confidence.
Adding in the practice of syncing with my cycle, I see that I’m
given opportunities to build confidence in putting my preferences
first. When I allow myself to do less each month in my menstrual
phase, for example, I’m experiencing more moments of feeling
grounded and good in my body. Then I can reference this feeling
when I’m making decisions in general. I know what being aligned
feels like, versus the sensations of confusion, stress, and anxiety
that are my body’s ways of letting me know when I’m out of
alignment with my optimal flow. This practice keeps me coming
back into my body and feeling safe about being my own reference
point for decisions. It’s hugely freeing.
I’m only now appreciating how much being disconnected from
my cycle and my body has created so much anxiety throughout my
life. I remember feeling a low level of anxiousness as a teen about
homework, deadlines, and social situations. My hormonal
imbalances during that time added to it as well. Now, almost two
decades into cycle syncing, I find that I’m more at ease with things
and I am able to navigate occasional anxiety better. For example, if
I wake and feel a flood of stress, I’ll check in about why—asking
myself about whether I’m getting enough sleep, where I am in my
cycle, and what’s happening in my life in general. I’ll shift my
self-care to prioritize helping myself address the anxious energy
with food and exercise that are phase-specific.
I am committed to being at ease and choosing to feel good.
And it is, for me, a personal revolution. I can only imagine that if
we all as women committed to choosing to feel good what kind of
cultural shifts could be created. We can do more of creating ease
and balance in the world the more we practice it internally for
ourselves. Even though it is a small thing to choose feeling good,
to take a walk, to do what’s aligned for us in our cycles, the ripple
effect from this on our families and communities would be
powerful.
Managing Your Creative Process According
to Your Cycle
Women can—and do—create differently depending on which gifts
are brought forward by each phase of our cycle. As those strengths
fluctuate from week to week, you don’t have to feel like a
hormonal victim, as if you’re being hit unexpectedly by waves that
toss you around and threaten to pull you under. By tapping into
your hormonal shifts, you can become a steady, predictable
powerhouse, and surf those waves for greater performance with
less effort and more satisfaction. Once you understand how your
hormones influence your strengths throughout the month, it
becomes very simple to leverage that knowledge for more
successful project planning and performance.
Research from 2017 dispels the myth that our cycle has a
negative effect on our cognitive function at certain times of the
month. You can do anything at any time during your cycle, but just
because you can do it doesn’t mean you ought to do it. Going with
your own FLO is where you start to experience your peak state
more often.
When we match our activities with our unique skill sets during
each of the four phases of our cycle—instead of expending all our
energy trying to force ourselves to focus on similar tasks day in
and day out—we can accomplish more of what we truly want to be
doing and prioritize what’s right for our bodies with less effort. All
of a sudden we shift from feeling like we don’t ever have enough
time, to feeling like we have plenty of time to do all that we want
and need to do. We have more space to get things done. We can
perform at our highest levels and feel more energized at the end of
the day.
This same four-step creative matrix plays out in all the projects
we undertake and in our business cycles. Let’s say you need to
update your website. You’ll start with a brainstorming session
(initiation), then produce all the copy and images you’ll need
(growth), then input all the new material and changes
(completion), then sit back and evaluate any final tweaks that
could be made (rest). Whichever phase of the project you’re in,
you can bring forth the best of your cyclical phase at the moment.
The same goes for business cycles. For example, in my own
business, sometimes we are in what I would call an ovulatory
phase. Our main objective would be spreading the word about
what we do through marketing. At other times, we’re in more of a
luteal phase, tackling behind-the-scenes tasks such as updating our
systems. Although these tasks are more luteal in nature, I can bring
the strengths of my follicular, ovulatory, luteal, and menstrual
phases to the projects at different times.
The Cycle Syncing Method™: Creative FLO
Phase Duration What’s Strengths Activities to
Happening Schedule
Hormonally
Follicular 7–10 Estrogen is Creativity Dream big,
days on the rise. brainstorm,
PREPARE
initiate,
prepare, and
plan.
Research, be
curious,
explore,
interview
people, take
courses,
gather
resources, and
chart your
strategy. Set
your
intentions for
the week,
month, or
year ahead.
Clarify your
vision and get
new projects
off the
ground. Fill in
your planner
with what you
want to
accomplish in
the coming
weeks.
Ovulatory 3–4 days Estrogen is Communication Socialize,
at its highest and pitch ideas,
OPEN UP
point. collaboration and be seen.
Talk about
your plans,
collaborate
with others on
projects,
schedule
dates and
meetings, go
to lunch with
girlfriends,
host a party,
and connect
with others.
Have
important
conversations.
Luteal 10–14 Progesterone Completion, This is your
days is at its nurturing, get-it-done
WORK
tending phase! Don’t
highest procrastinate.
point. Get
organized.
Accomplish
the projects
and goals you
planned
during your
follicular
phase. Feel
good about
wrapping
things up.
Attend to
your home,
finances, and
administrative
tasks. Do
your deep
work.
Celebrate
how powerful
you are.
Menstrual 3–7 days All of your Evaluation and Relax and
hormones intuition reflect on the
REST
are at a low past month.
point. Be kind with
yourself as
you review all
the good
things you’ve
accomplished,
and note any
areas of your
life that feel
less than
optimal or
that need
attention. It’s
especially
important to
trust your
instincts
during this
phase. Is your
gut telling
you
something?
Spend time
journaling,
reviewing,
and noting
what you
might need to
let go of and
what you
might need to
shift in the
coming
month. Use
this as a
starting point
for setting
intentions
during your
next follicular
phase.
Plan-Her: A Cyclical Approach to
Managing Your Energy
After I latched on to the concept of scheduling in accordance with
the natural rhythm of my hormones, I began teaching a right-
timing / energy management program to women in corporations. I
present them with a female-centered planning tool (see here) to
help them get in the FLO on a personal level and on a team basis
in the workplace. As someone who has tried almost every time
management system possible, I created one that adopts the best
practices from each of them and aligns with your female biology
so you can be productive in a healthy, balanced, and sustainable
way. This planner is special because it’s not just a place to write
your to-do list, but a tool to help you incorporate your body, mind,
energy, and mood into the projects of your day, week, and month.
The planner not only ensures that you prevent burnout and energy
leaks but also ensures that you have more time to focus on the
things that really matter to you, so you can feel more fulfilled and
centered each day regardless of what life throws at you. Of course,
I think the planner I’ve created is ideal for scheduling in a way that
maximizes our cyclical nature, but you can always create your
own planner using these same principles. The Daily FLO Planner I
created is organized into the following sections:
Current phase: Keep track of the phase of the cycle you’re in so
you ensure you curate the right projects each phase and stay
connected to your body.
Monthly theme: Make note of which monthly theme you’re
focusing on. Choose monthly themes based on the natural
seasonal cycles of the year. I use these themes as a way to
ensure I’m touching all the most important aspects of my life
throughout the year. For example, March is a cleansing and
detoxing month for me. This theme might translate into a
weekend of cleaning out my closets or switching out my winter
wardrobe for my spring and summer clothes. This way, I don’t
get to May 1 and think, “Oh, no! It’s already spring, and I still
haven’t put my winter coats away.” You can experiment with
your own monthly themes and you can follow along with our
monthly themes in the Cycle Syncing Membership.
Tasks or work focus: In this section, you can plan out what
you’re doing and when. Be sure to note the focus of the phase
as a whole, whether it’s creativity, communication, completion,
or evaluation. Outline your top three points of focus for the
day. What is really essential for you to accomplish today? How
does it all fit into the routine of your day? Use morning,
afternoon, and evening sections to write out a plan for the day
in as much detail as possible.
Food plan: This section helps you organize your meal plan
throughout the day with phase-specific recipes.
Self-care focus: In this section, you can keep track of specific
ways to nurture yourself, based on your current cycle phase
combined with what want or need to accomplish on this day.
Energy check-in: Here you’ll assess how you’re feeling with your
energy, mood, sleep, and any symptoms. Do you feel
energized, or do you feel drained by the end of the day? This is
such an important question to ask yourself each and every day.
If you consistently feel zonked, it’s a big red flag that you’re
probably overstressing your adrenals and taxing your system.
End-of-day reflections: Jot down anything that helps you check
in with yourself. Ask yourself how you feel about how your
day went. How did you do with your cyclical planning? What
worked for you? Many of the women I see really love this part
of the planner because it lets them dedicate some space and
time to their emotional self. Here you can pump yourself up
with some positive reinforcement. These are some examples of
what women jot down in this section:
“It feels so good to give myself permission to do the things
that are right for me when I need to do them.”
“I took some ‘me’ time today, and the world didn’t fall apart
like I thought it would.”
“I’m not gaining weight even though I didn’t do a hardcore
workout.”
“Wow! I haven’t had PMS all week. This is really making me
feel better!”
“I’m feeling so energized!”
These statements are in stark contrast to the way we typically
talk to ourselves. Think about it. Prior to understanding your
body’s need for a cyclical lifestyle, you had to motivate yourself
through fear, guilt, and anxiety. I remember reading words of
singer and poet Vanessa Daou that stopped me in my tracks:
“There’s no greater beating than that of the fine lashing of
woman’s tongue upon her own mind.” When I read this, it hit me
right between the ovaries. It called out my own masochistic
behavior in response to trying to be the same day in and day out.
We tend to berate ourselves at the end of every day with negative
thoughts like these:
“I didn’t push myself hard enough at the gym today. I suck.”
“I didn’t get enough done today. I’m such a slacker.”
“I ate super unhealthy foods today. I have no willpower.”
As a recovering perfectionist, I used to be a big offender in this
category. To this day, there are still times when I have to remind
myself to shift my mindset from this negative space to one of
compassion and gratitude. One of the most beautiful things I
notice when women begin syncing with their cycle is their ability
to stop this emotional self-abuse and start opening their hearts to
self-love.
Here are some additional tips to make your planner work best
for you.
Red-flag demands on your time and energy: Each day, ask
yourself, “Are there demands on my time that are out of sync
with my cycle?” For example, if you’re on a tight deadline at
work and have so much to do, but your body is in the
menstrual phase and needs more down time, make a note of
this misalignment, because these work demands are not ideal
for this phase of your cycle. In this case, add in an extra piece
of self-care to ensure you’re balancing out your body’s needs
and giving it the nourishment it requires so that you don’t burn
out. I realize we don’t live in a perfect world where everybody
and everything around us can sync to our personal hormonal
cycle. (Wouldn’t that be nice, though?) But we still don’t have
to abandon ourselves. When this happens to me—and as a
busy entrepreneur, wife, and mother, you can bet it happens
more frequently than I would like—I immediately get
strategic. If possible, I move work demands to a different
phase. But if something can’t be shifted or delayed due to a
deadline or other obligation, I come up with a plan to upgrade
my self-care on that day or in the days leading up to that date
to offset or compensate for the extra energy requirement.
Schedule downtime: Remember, right-timing relies on the natural
ebb and flow of your hormones and energy levels. Time for
rest and relaxation is required to balance the periods of activity.
Block out R&R time in your planner just as if you were
scheduling an appointment with a client. When that time is
blocked out in your schedule, you’re more likely to follow
through, and you’ve given it equal importance with the other
items on the day’s to-do list.
Give yourself some wiggle room: Remember that your cycle
phases are not distinct. They transition gradually from one to
the next, so it will never work out perfectly that each week of
the month starts and ends exactly with your cycle phase. This
is a good thing! It means you don’t have to be “perfect” or
“precise” throughout this process. Instead, you can feel your
way into your schedule and flow with your own energy and
phase awareness. You know your body best. The idea is that
the more you practice living cyclically, the more in tune you’ll
get, the more you’ll learn to trust your body, and the more your
life will flow.
Less Doing, More Being
When I returned from my trip to India, my entire perception of
success and happiness had changed. I no longer felt tethered to the
notion that doing more is better, or the belief that if I had a
particular thing, then I’d be happy. And it became painfully
obvious that the idea of trying to make it to the top by doing more!
more! more! even if it was hurting my health no longer made any
sense at all. For example, while I was working on this book, I was
invited to speak at several local events by some friends and
colleagues. Our cultural conditioning tells us we should just say
yes—women are taught to be people pleasers—but I knew that I
needed to conserve my energy so I could be optimally creative and
focused on writing. So I said no and explained why. And you
know what? No one was upset. But I was proud of myself. This
represented success to me—advocating on my own behalf and
looking out for myself. I relish these little wins just as much as the
big projects at work.

When you say goodbye to the productivity treadmill patterned
after the 24-hour clock and hello to a paradigm based on the dual
clock that includes your female biological rhythms, you open the
doors to happy hormones, healthier biological systems, and the
path to more sustainable success and creativity in your personal
life and at work. What is work anyway? Essentially, it’s creating
something from nothing. Work starts with an idea of how to fill
that void. Think of work—whether it’s in your personal or
professional life—as the process of bringing those ideas to life. We
create projects. We develop presentations. We launch new
products. Women are ideally wired to create out of a blank space.
A fertile void exists within the womb, and from this empty space
springs new life. In nature, all living things adhere to that seed-
growth-bloom-rest cycle that fascinated me so much in my first
biology class. Your body is attuned to create in this same pattern.
You have brainstorming sessions to plant the seeds of a new idea.
You nurture that concept as it sprouts. You launch it and make it
grow. You wrap it up and evaluate its performance before moving
on to the next cycle of creation.
Similarly, all living things go through periods of activity and
rest, expansion and retraction. Think of the growth pattern of a
field. Farmers understand that they need to rotate their crops,
allowing the harvested soil to rest and replenish itself, or it will not
produce. We need to follow these same patterns to optimize our
hormones and biological systems so we can reach our greatest
potential. I love the way Julia Cameron, the bestselling author of
The Artist’s Way, writes about the importance of “fallow” time
being nonnegotiable for the creative process. Our current perpetual
productivity model, when applied to farming—demanding
continuous harvest and maximum output—relies on toxic
biohacking, with harmful fertilizers, pesticides, and GMO seeds.
Perpetual productivity isn’t sustainable, and it’s damaging our
environment and making us sick.
These same patterns hold true for our bodies. If you’re
constantly “doing,” you aren’t giving your brain and body the rest
they need to restore your creative juices. We need to have fallow
days to reenergize our minds, bodies, and creativity. Instead of
expecting to add ever more on to your overwhelming to-do list
every day, and relying on artificial energy boosters, take time to
connect to your body and get grounded. Look for inspiration. Take
a walk in nature. Watch your dog or cat playing. Dance to your
favorite song. Stretch your body. Give your brain and body time to
explore possibilities you never imagined. In this way, you refresh
your hormones and biological systems rather than draining them
so you can feel more energetic and be on top of your game.
TAKE THE EGG APPROACH
Once a month, when a mature egg is released by your
ovaries, it waits calmly in the fallopian tube for
fertilization. The egg doesn’t chase the sperm; it doesn’t
need to. The chemicals it radiates make it so irresistibly
attractive, the sperm go into a wild frenzy trying to reach it.
Millions of sperm swim upstream on their quest to find the
alluring egg. Most will get lost along the way, but a few
hundred of them will make it to the gorgeous orb, with
only one lucky swimmer being selected by the egg and
earning the honor of fertilizing her. It’s a great analogy for
us to learn from. We don’t always have to chase. If we
position ourselves properly like the egg, more things can
flow to us. This applies to the creative process. Both
pushing and receiving are essential to the success of the
creative process. And if conditions are not optimal for
fertilization, the egg passes via the period, and another
cycle and opportunity can be expected. You don’t have to
compensate for your cyclical way of being: focus on
showing up fully energized, trust the timing of your body,
and choose to feel good.
WHAT ABOUT SYNCING WITH THE LUNAR
CYCLE?
My social media feeds are filled with women sharing their
new moon rituals and asking if they should be bleeding
during the new moon or the full moon. So many women
feel a pull to tap into the goddess culture by syncing their
cycle with the lunar phases. This is a completely natural
desire considering that the light our eyes were designed to
take in—moonlight and sunlight—affects our pineal and
pituitary glands, which stimulates our circadian rhythms
and hormone production. It’s reasonable to imagine that in
the past, many women who lived in communities might all
bleed at the same time during the new moon and follow the
rhythm of the lunar cycle because they were all exposed to
the same light—waking with the sun in the morning,
sleeping when the sun went down, and being exposed to
powerful and changing moonlight at night. This is the
reason fertility festivals were held on the full moon; that’s
when a woman was most likely ovulating. People observed
the connection between the cycles of the earth, the moon,
and women’s bodies, and created rituals that worked in
harmony with them. In our modern world, however, we
live in a light-polluted environment with perpetual
brightness. Many of us can’t even see the moon at night.
And we have all this blue light from our tech devices
further disrupting our circadian rhythms. We’re so
detached from the lunar-based cycles of our female
ancestors, we have to gradually work our way back to the
way nature intended our bodies to work. The first step is to
restore your own menstrual rhythm by syncing with your
cycle. Then start reducing your exposure to blue light and
make it a practice to go out and see the moon and stars at
night.
This can work even if you live in a big city. I live in a
city and can manage to do it if I’m diligent. At first my
cycle would rarely sync with the lunar phases, but then I
moved to a different apartment where I can see the moon
transiting every night. And it has deeply affected my cycle.
More often, I’ll ovulate on the full moon and bleed on the
new moon. But you don’t have to move to get in tune with
the moon. I also keep a lunar calendar where I can see it,
and I do my best to use blue-light blockers to minimize
circadian disruption. I think of syncing with the lunar
phases as a bonus that I enjoy, but it definitely isn’t a
requirement for optimal biological functioning. If your
phases aren’t following the lunar cycle, don’t let this stress
you out. Take advantage of all the benefits of syncing to
your own cycle and then explore syncing with the lunar
cycles if that’s something you would like to experience.
And take note that if you are not cycling for any reason—if
you’re postmenopausal, if cancer treatment has eliminated
your period, or if you’re transgender, for example—you
can use the lunar patterns to remain connected to a cyclical
energy.
After reading this chapter, you now know that you’re uniquely
wired to create in a way that reflects your inner hormonal patterns
and that following a rhythm will heighten your efficiency and
productivity, and give you greater access to your creativity. You
may even have intuitively felt this way at times without having
anyone define it or put a frame around it. And you may have
recognized yourself within the pages of this chapter and thought,
“Yes! This is my reality.” Even so, you may still be hesitant to dive
in to this new way of scheduling your energy and your life. It
might seem risky, as if you’ll be swimming against the tide. Can
you really succeed in today’s perpetual productivity culture if
you’re operating on a cyclical pattern? The answer is yes! You
simply need to be willing to experiment with this female-centered
way of living, so you can see for yourself how good it feels. When
you give it a chance, it will allow your body to sustainably
accompany your imagination on the ride toward creating a life you
love.
In the FLO Four-Week Quick-Start Plan
Determine which phase you’re in.
Decide if you’ll start with food or workouts.
Week 1: For the phase you’re in, sync either just your food or
just your workouts.
Week 2: For your next phase, sync both your food and your
workouts.
Week 3: For the third phase, while maintaining the food and
workout elements, look at your schedule and task list and see
what activities are in sync with that phase, note how many are
out of sync, and make some decisions about what can stay
and what should get moved to another phase.
Week 4: Take out your daily planner, look at the next four
phases, and plan your ideal schedule for the next whole cycle.
Biohacking Tool Kit
Part 1
How to Get in the FLO When Your
Hormones Are Out of Balance
When women take care of their health, they
become their own best friend.
—MAYA ANGELOU
W
hen you understand the science behind it, syncing with
your cycle makes so much sense. Of course you want to
balance your hormones so you can get rid of cramps, bloating,
and heavy periods, or more serious conditions like
endometriosis or PCOS. But that’s just the starting point.
When your hormones function optimally, they become a force
that enhances every biological system in your body—boosting
your moods, creativity, energy, and so much more. When you
feel great, your productivity, relationships, and ability to be a
great mom all improve. Feeling good helps you achieve your
life goals without all the suffering. Learning about all these
advantages may make you want to jump right in to syncing
with your cycle. But what if your period doesn’t arrive like
clockwork every month? What if it’s irregular, or even MIA,
some months? What if you’re suffering from hormone hell?
How do you start syncing with your cycle when you don’t
even know what phase you’re in? I’ve got you. This section is
dedicated to all you women who are dealing with hormonal
issues, the same way I was when I was diagnosed with PCOS.
And it shows you that when you have symptoms, doing
nothing is not an option. You can and must hack your
symptoms to promote healing. This Biohacking Tool Kit will
show you how to do it. It will help you understand why you’re
having the symptoms you’re experiencing, what the research
shows about what works to alleviate them naturally, and how
to biohack your way back into balance quickly now or
whenever you might find yourself out of optimal hormonal
flow. If you need to dive deeper for your specific condition,
I’ve added individual biohacking guides that you can
download whenever you need.
WHAT IF I DON’T HAVE HORMONAL
ISSUES?
If you don’t have any serious hormonal issues, feel free
to skim this chapter or go straight to the sections that
interest you. For example, if you’re on the pill or
you’re a mom with a preteen or teenage daughter and
are considering putting her on oral contraceptives for
period problems, I highly encourage you to check out
the section on hormonal birth control. If you have
PCOS, fibroids, endometriosis, heavy painful periods,
missing periods, or severe PMS, then read on.
I first want to say that I truly understand your frustration!
When I was dealing with my PCOS issues, I was always
looking for spot treatments for my acne, diets to try to lose the
weight I’d gained, and some medication that would regulate
my period. I went to one doctor for my skin, another to help
me with my weight, and yet another to deal with my missing
period. You’ve probably done the same thing in trying to
eliminate your cramps, mood swings, or acne. The medical
industry generally takes the same symptom-focused approach
to our period problems, offering over-the-counter pain
relievers, hormonal contraceptives, antidepressants, or surgical
interventions to treat individual symptoms. But this way of
thinking about how to treat our hormones needs updating with
a more functional medicine–based approach.
Many treatments for individual symptoms have significant
side effects. Several over-the-counter pain relievers contain
caffeine, which isn’t ideal for women for all the reasons you
read about in chapter 4, or affect the liver, further
compromising estrogen metabolism. Other medications impact
your hormonal system in negative ways. And when these
medications fail to do the job, what comes next may be
prolonged suffering or surgery. Historically, we have been
given two options: (1) do nothing and suffer, or (2) utilize
treatments that don’t correct what’s causing the problem and
that have serious side effects. There has to be a better way that
enhances our biochemical and biological nature. Rest assured,
there is a solution. It lies in acknowledging the fact that all of
our seemingly disparate hormonal symptoms all stem from the
same root cause: disrupted endocrine function.
This is one of the most exciting findings in my research.
When I first put together the FLO protocol, described in
WomanCode, I was excited to discover that most hormonal
symptoms stem from the same root causes. In nature, as
explained by Einstein and Mandelbrot, things are often elegant
and straightforward despite seeming complex. Women’s
menstrual disturbances may appear to be complex, but they
mostly all come down to the ways in which the endocrine
system has been interrupted. The FLO protocol I created is
designed to address the underlying endocrine dysfunction that
results in all those symptoms. If you have a diagnosed
menstrual issue, there are three critical steps in the FLO
protocol that must come before you start syncing with your
cycle:
1. Stabilize your blood sugar.
2. Nurture your adrenals.
3. Support the organs of elimination.
Addressing these in this order is the key to restoring
balance to your endocrine system. Stabilizing your blood sugar
is critical because unstable blood sugar wreaks havoc on your
hormonal health. Your brain and body need glucose to
function, but many of us consume too much refined sugar,
which disrupts our endocrine function. Eating carbohydrates
triggers the body’s insulin response, but too much glucose and
too much insulin send your blood sugar levels soaring,
followed by a big crash. The spikes disrupt ovulation, reducing
the production of progesterone, and can lead to estrogen
dominance, which you now know is behind many common
period problems. Nurturing your adrenals helps to balance
cortisol levels—another key hormone that, out of balance, can
disrupt your cycle—and helps protect your body against stress.
And supporting the body’s pathways of elimination—the skin,
liver, large intestine, and lymphatic system—helps your body
eliminate excess estrogen.
Because we’re left in the dark about how our bodies work,
we don’t see the interconnectedness of each symptom, and we
believe that every period problem requires some
individualized, targeted treatment. That is not the case. I want
you to stop thinking of your period problems as a collection of
random symptoms that you need to address one by one, and
start thinking of them as signs of a systemic endocrine
imbalance. When you see things this way, the path to
hormonal health becomes clearer. It becomes obvious that
taking a pill without changing anything else can never heal
your hormones. Remember, your endocrine system is made up
of several glands and organs. How can one medication address
your thyroid, hypothalamus, adrenals, ovaries, and so on? It’s
not logical. There’s only one way to address such a complex,
interconnected system within the body, and that’s by
supporting your endocrine system as a whole. In this section,
you’ll discover the cleanup work you need to do to balance
your hormones before you can begin syncing with your cycle.
Step 1: Check Your Fifth Vital Sign—A
Personalized, Monthly Hormone Test
I’m all for high-tech self-optimization trackers. In addition, the
body has so much biofeedback available to provide you with
real-time health information if you know how to evaluate it.
Your period is an excellent hormonal self-evaluation tool. It’s
like getting lab work every month that gives you an immediate
heads-up about any hormonal imbalances. The key to taking
advantage of what your period is trying to tell you? You’ve got
to look. Yes, before you double-wrap that tampon or pad in
toilet paper and toss it in the trash, give it a good once-over.
Getting familiar with your flow can provide invaluable clues
to your overall health. As I mentioned earlier, your period
health is so critical a vital sign as temperature and blood
pressure that the American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists have decreed it a fifth vital sign. Think of it as
your own personal monthly hormonal checkup.
After working with thousands of women, I’ve identified
five period types, which I call V-SignTM Types. Check the
descriptions that follow to find your type, and take the quick
assessment at www.FLOliving.com/what-is-your-v-sign to
learn more about what you need to do to get back on track.
Whatever type you are, remember that changing your diet and
supplements can modify a troublesome period within a cycle
or two.
Red V-Sign Type: If you see cranberry or cherry red when
you change your tampon or pad and the blood is clot-free, it’s
an indication that your hormone levels are balanced. Celebrate
your good hormonal health this cycle!
Purple V-Sign Type: When you look at your period blood,
is it a deep purple-blue color with clots and clumps? This is a
sign that your estrogen levels are too high in proportion to
progesterone, which can cause the uterine lining to be thicker
than normal. This results in heavier periods and more severe
PMS symptoms, including stronger cramps, bigger mood
swings, and depression. Excess estrogen can lead to common
period problems, such as fibroids, cysts, or endometriosis.
When high estrogen levels remain unchecked, it can increase
the risk of certain medical conditions, including thyroid
dysfunction and breast or ovarian cancer.
Brown V-Sign Type: Without enough progesterone, the
uterus doesn’t shed completely, and the leftover lining
oxidizes and turns brown. If you’re trying to conceive, low
progesterone makes it harder to maintain a pregnancy during
the first trimester. Does your period blood resemble prune
juice? Seeing a brownish color on Day 1 or on the last couple
days of your period indicates your progesterone levels may be
too low, which increases your chances of longer cycles or
skipping cycles. Women with this type of bleeding may
experience mood swings, anxiety, depression, trouble
concentrating, sleep disturbances, headaches or migraines, and
low libido.
If you’re trying to conceive, be aware that low
progesterone makes it harder to carry a pregnancy through the
first trimester. Many of the women I see with low progesterone
also experience hot flashes and other symptoms usually
associated with perimenopause, even if they’re still in their
twenties or early thirties. Over time, your uterine lining may
build up abnormally, leading to a condition called endometrial
hyperplasia, which can lead to uterine cancer in some cases.
Pink V-Sign Type: If your blood is pale pink in color on
the first and last few days of your period, it’s a sign that your
estrogen levels are too low. When your body doesn’t pump out
enough of this hormone, your uterine lining doesn’t build up
the way it should with each cycle. Shorter periods are a
common side effect of low estrogen levels. Insufficient
estrogen can also put you on the fast track to aging and is
associated with osteoporosis and heart issues later in life. Low
estrogen is one of the hallmarks of perimenopause and
menopause and is associated with loss of skin elasticity,
vaginal dryness, low sex drive, hair thinning, anxiety and
depression, and difficulty conceiving. Younger women with
low estrogen levels may experience these same symptoms
even if they are years away from perimenopause.
Missing/Irregular V-Sign Type: Is your period erratic and
unpredictable? Is it a toss-up if you’ll see purple, brown, pink,
or red blood when it finally does show up? These are signs
that something is off-kilter. If you go months without getting
your period, it’s a major red flag that your hormones are out of
whack. Do you get your period more than once every month?
Does it only last one or two days? Do you have spotting
between periods? If so, your period is too short, which can be
caused by low estrogen levels or thyroid dysfunction. If you
have a short cycle, it’s a good idea to have your gynecologist
check your hormone levels. On the flip side, if you go more
than thirty-five days between periods, your cycle is too long.
This may be an indicator that your body isn’t producing
adequate amounts of FSH and LH to trigger ovulation, or that
progesterone levels are too low to prompt the uterus to shed its
lining. Long cycles may also be due to adrenal or pituitary
issues, so be sure to make an appointment with your health
care provider to get to the root cause. If your cycle goes MIA
for more than sixty days, it could be due to one or more of the
issues described above. Another reason your period may have
gone on vacation is you may not have enough body fat for a
healthy cycle. A period that’s gone missing can be a sign of
medical conditions, such as PCOS, amenorrhea, or adrenal
hyperplasia, so don’t hesitate to see your doctor for a
diagnosis. If your cycle gets shorter or longer or becomes
unpredictable, it may also be a sign that you’re entering
perimenopause, depending on your age. Check in with your
gynecologist for a hormone workup.
PERIODS: WHAT IS “NORMAL,”
ANYWAY?
Cycle length: Your cycle should last twenty-eight to
thirty-two days—anywhere in between is fine as
long as it is regular and consistent for you.
Color: Your bleed should be the color of deep red
cranberry juice or dark cherry juice from start to
finish.
Flow length: Ideally, your period should last four to
seven days.
Flow consistency: You should have a strong flow
without any clots, and it shouldn’t be
inconveniently heavy or have you feeling like
you’re bleeding through menstrual care products
every hour.
Physical sensations: You should be able to feel your
uterus in action with some slight sensations or
warm feelings, but you shouldn’t experience any
kind of pain that would make you reach for drugs
or hot water bottles.
Analyze Your Results
After you’ve completed your personal audit, take stock of your
situation. If you only have mild or even severe PMS—
bloating, acne, cramps—but everything else with your period
is relatively normal, go ahead and start syncing with your
cycle; doing so will help alleviate those symptoms. If,
however, your period is missing or you have been diagnosed
with a menstrual condition like PCOS or endometriosis, then
you need to do a little more groundwork by following the steps
in the rest of this chapter. If you’re postpartum or
breastfeeding and are wondering if you can sync with your
second clock, see chapter 9 for specifics on these particular
life stages.
Step 2: Adopt a Biohacking Mindset
“Everybody gets cramps.” “PMS is normal.” “You’re destined
to suffer from your period.” As you now know, these
menstrual myths are BS. The biggest falsehood associated
with your monthly cycle is that once you have period
problems, you’re stuck with them. This particular myth, which
is so deeply ingrained in our society, is fundamentally
disempowering and perpetuates a course of inaction when it
comes to your hormonal health. This myth makes your cycle
seem so mysterious, so unpredictable, and so unmanageable
that there is nothing you can do about your period problems.
So you do nothing. And guess what? Your period problems get
worse, so you assume the myths were correct. So not only do
you feel that you have to continue suffering from your
monthly woes, but you also put your biological systems at
risk, which can lead to serious long-term health issues. In
addition, you don’t get to take advantage of any of the magic
that happens when your hormones are balanced and you’re in
sync with your cycle. You miss out on the revved-up energy,
happier moods, and cognitive clarity that come with a finely
tuned cyclical life.
It doesn’t have to be this way. You don’t have to suffer
with PMS, PCOS, uterine fibroids, endometriosis, or any other
hormonal issue for the rest of your life. Natalia had been
dealing with endometriosis for five years. There were times
the pain was so intense she couldn’t even walk. She tried birth
control pills as suggested by her doctor, but they didn’t help.
When she got off the pill and started supporting her hormonal
health with foods and supplements and eventually by syncing
with her cycle, things changed. After six months, her
endometriosis pains vanished almost completely—once in a
while when she’s ovulating she feels some minor cramping,
which she rates as a one or two on a scale of one to ten. She
says 95 percent of the time she’s acne-free, bloating-free,
PMS-free, refreshed, and energized. And when she does feel
these symptoms, even a little bit, she immediately knows what
caused them and can take action to address them. That’s the
beauty of the Cycle Syncing Method™. As you’ve seen, it can
keep symptoms in remission. But it’s up to you to be your own
hormonal advocate. I learned this lesson the hard way. When I
first got my PCOS diagnosis, I couldn’t believe that medicine
had nothing to cure my condition. But that was the push I
needed to become the Biohacker-in-Chief of my own body.
Now it’s your turn.
Step 3: Remove Endocrine Disruptors
It’s not easy these days for hormones. Our modern
environment is filled with chemicals, pesticides,
pharmaceuticals, and artificial lighting that make it hard to
keep our hormones happy and humming. On a daily basis,
we’re exposed to hundreds of chemicals found in the air,
water, soil, food, and consumer products that interfere with the
production, secretion, transport, metabolism, binding action, or
elimination of the body’s natural hormones. These endocrine
disruptors often mimic naturally occurring hormones—
including estrogen, thyroid, and androgens—which confuses
the biological endocrine system and can lead to imbalances.
Disruptors may bind to receptors within cells, which prevents
the natural hormones from being able to do so, and effectively
interrupts the typical messaging and signaling that is supposed
to occur between the hormone and its intended destination.
These dirty disruptors can also trip up the way the liver
metabolizes and eliminates hormones. Ultimately, these
disruptors can wreak havoc with our hormones and negatively
impact our biological systems, setting us up for physical and
mental health issues.
Sadly, these infiltrators are everywhere. You come in
contact with them in household cleaners, skincare products,
cosmetics, personal care products, pharmaceuticals, plastics,
and food. An independent research group, Women’s Voices for
the Earth, discovered that twenty of the most popular
household cleaning products contain reproductive toxins, such
as toluene and phthalates, as well as a hormone-disrupting
synthetic musk, among other toxins. Research shows many of
these toxins are bio-accumulative and can disrupt hormonal
balance.
Exposure to endocrine disruptors has been linked to a
laundry list of conditions, including estrogen dominance, early
puberty, and infertility, as well as increased risk for breast and
thyroid cancers. With so many environmental toxins affecting
our endocrine system, we can’t be passive and expect our
hormonal cycle to sing in harmony. And we can’t count on our
government to do it for us. The European Union has banned
more than 1,300 chemicals from being used in cosmetics,
according to the Campaign for Safe Cosmetics. How many has
the US banned? About thirty, says Credo Beauty, which has
created a Dirty List of ingredients linked to health or
environmental issues. It’s up to us to take charge of our own
health.
Now it’s time to take stock of your exposure to potential
disruptors. Check any of the following that apply to you:
1. Do you eat nonorganic foods?
2. Do you eat meat that isn’t antibiotic-free and hormone-
free, or do you eat farmed fish?
3. Do you drink water from plastic bottles?
4. Do you use chemical-laden household cleaning products
and detergents?
5. Do you use drugstore cosmetics and skincare products?
6. Do you use hair care products that aren’t all natural?
7. Do you use standard nail polish?
If you checked several of these questions, you could be
stacking the deck against your hormones. Fortunately, positive
changes can happen quickly. According to a study in a 2014
issue of Environmental Research, switching your diet from
conventionally produced foods to organic foods reduces
urinary output of pesticides by nearly 90 percent—in just
seven days! This reveals how quickly you can begin to turn
things around if you make a concerted effort to eat in a way
that supports your hormones.
Step 4: Use Food to Fight Your
Symptoms
Whether you have a serious or mild menstrual condition, the
foods you eat can minimize your symptoms and help balance
your hormones. If you have any of the following conditions or
symptoms, take strength in knowing that you can eat your way
to improving these conditions. Here are the best and worst
foods for your condition.
Fibroids
Have you been told you have uterine fibroids? Research shows
that most women will develop these benign tumors in their
lifetime. These noncancerous growths develop in the wall of
the uterus and can be as small as a pea or so large that the
fibroid makes the uterus swell as if you were six or seven
months pregnant. Some women have fibroids but aren’t aware
of them because the women have no symptoms. Other women,
however, get hit with a storm of symptoms, including heavy
bleeding, periods that last more than seven days, painful
periods, spotting between periods, pain during intercourse,
lower back pain, frequent urination, and reproductive
problems. The medical community has yet to identify what
causes some women to develop fibroids, but researchers point
to hormones as a factor. Fibroids tend to grow when levels of
estrogen are high. They usually stop growing and shrink in
size after menopause, when estrogen levels typically decrease.
Because of this link to estrogen, it’s important to support your
body so it can effectively flush out any excess estrogen.
FLO-approved biohack: Eat more flaxseeds. They act as
a natural type of selective estrogen receptor modulators
(SERMs), substances that impact estrogen’s effect in the body.
SERMs may block estrogen sensitivity in the uterus, and some
studies have found them to be beneficial for women with
fibroids. These tasty seeds are also high in fiber, omega-3 fatty
acids, and lignans, which help flush excess estrogen out of the
body and prevent absorption of excess estrogen. Add
unprocessed, organic fermented soy in the form of tempeh and
miso to your diet for its anti-estrogenic effect on the uterus.
Beans—especially kidney beans, lentils, and mung beans—
provide healthy fiber and protein. And because they have a
low glycemic index, beans can reduce inflammation, which
researchers are increasingly looking at as another factor that
can cause fibroid growth. High-fiber whole grains, such as
oats and brown rice, also crank up how quickly your body
processes and eliminates excess estrogen. Eat pears and
apples, which contain a flavonoid named phloretin that inhibits
tumor growth.
Worst foods for fibroids: Avoid all processed soy
products, such as soy cheese, soy meat, and other meat and
dairy replacements. Skip processed red meats, and ditch white
starchy foods, including bread, pasta, and noodles. It’s also
best to eliminate alcohol and caffeine, which can overtax your
liver and reduce its ability to clear excess estrogen from the
body.
Fibroid biohacking guide: www.FLOliving.com/fibroids-
guide.
Endometriosis
Endometriosis is a painful condition in which the tissue that
lines the inside of the uterus—the endometrium—grows
outside the uterus. This tissue is sensitive to fluctuating
estrogen levels throughout the cycle as well as to the
prostaglandins that contribute to either uterine contractions or
uterine relaxation. This endometrial tissue can adhere to other
tissues like the intestines and bladder or even within the
abdominal cavity and can create spasms that affect digestion
and elimination and can cause pain. At its foundation,
endometriosis is a combination of an autoimmune-like
hormonal disorder with symptoms that are triggered by
chemical stress and excess estrogen.
FLO-approved biohack: Eat anti-inflammatory foods,
including leafy greens, broccoli, salmon, bone broth,
blueberries, and flaxseeds. To reduce pain, increase your
intake of foods high in magnesium, such as almonds,
avocados, sunflower seeds, pumpkin seeds, spinach, and black
beans.
Worst foods for endometriosis: Say good-bye to dairy,
alcohol, gluten, pesticide-laden foods, and red meat.
Endometriosis biohacking guide:
www.FLOliving.com/endo-guide.
PCOS
Polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS) is a hormonal health
condition that affects an estimated 10 million women. I was
one of them, but consider myself “in remission” from this
issue, which is often—but not always—associated with cysts
on the ovaries. There are several types of PCOS, but women
with the condition tend to have higher levels of androgens,
such as testosterone, which can lead to hirsutism (excess hair),
thinning hair, acne, and irregular periods. This condition is
also associated with lower progesterone levels, which further
contribute to irregular periods. And as my gynecologist told
me when I was finally diagnosed with PCOS, it set me up for
insulin resistance and increased risk for serious health
consequences, including diabetes, heart disease, obesity,
metabolic syndrome, infertility, miscarriage, liver
inflammation, and endometrial cancer.
FLO-approved biohack: Consume high-fiber foods like
beans and lentils, cruciferous veggies, sweet potatoes, and
almonds to combat insulin resistance, and remember it’s
always a good idea to cook cruciferous veggies (broccoli, kale,
Brussels sprouts, cabbage, and collard greens), because they
contain goitrogens that suppress thyroid function, contributing
to PCOS.
Worst foods for PCOS: Steer clear of caffeine, sugar,
dairy, red meat, artificial sweeteners, soy products, cooking
oils (canola, sunflower, and vegetable oils), and margarine.
PCOS biohacking guide: www.FLOliving.com/pcos-
guide.
Cramps
Are cramps keeping you on the sidelines? You’re not alone. I
meet so many women who tell me they spend several days a
month curled up on the couch or in bed waiting for the pain to
subside. I was one of them, too. I suffered from debilitating
cramps that rivaled labor contractions and would practically
knock me out. Of course, I needed to know why this was
happening. Turns out, there are two causes for cramps—one
chemical, one functional. Hormone-like substances called
prostaglandins, which are involved with pain and
inflammation, stimulate the uterine muscles to contract.
Prostaglandins also play a part in the vomiting, diarrhea, and
headaches that might come with your cycle. There are three
types of prostaglandins: PgE1, PgE2, and PgE3. The culprit
that causes uterine contractions and pain is PgE2. The more
PgE2 you make, the more intense your cramps. PgE1 and
PgE3 are antispasmodic in nature, relaxing the uterine
muscles, which makes them natural painkillers. On the
functional side, pain can be caused by any of the following
conditions: endometriosis, fibroids, infections, use of an
intrauterine device (IUD), ovarian cysts, narrow cervix, or a
retroverted (tipped) uterus.
FLO-approved biohack: When cramps hit, don’t
automatically reach for the ibuprofen. Try a few almonds or
hazelnuts instead—they’re good sources of vitamin E, which
has been shown to reduce period pain. And eat leafy greens
like collard greens for the magnesium, which reduces the
prostaglandins that cause cramps. To help prevent cramps,
take vitamin E and magnesium for a few days before your
period and for a few days after it starts. On a long-term basis,
you need to increase PgE1 and PgE3. Eating the right fats will
help you do it. For example, linoleic acid—found in foods like
salmon, sardines, flaxseeds, pumpkin seeds, sunflower seeds,
and sesame seeds—can help, so be sure to eat these foods on a
regular basis.
Worst foods for cramps: Dairy and saturated animal fats
increase PgE2, so limit them as much as possible, or ideally
cut them out of your diet. Omit canola oil and other refined
oils high in omega-6 because they increase the production of
cramp-causing PgE2.
Bloating
Do you know the most common causes of bloating? Check out
these three culprits that may be making it hard to zip up your
jeans.
A compromised microbiome: When you have an
overgrowth of bad bacteria in your gut, which is known
as dysbiosis, it can lead to inflammation. An inflamed gut
can lead to—no surprise here—bloating. As you’ve seen
in this book, the microbiome is made up of trillions of
microbes that play a role in processing and flushing
hormones out of the body. In particular, it’s the bacterial
colony known as the estrobolome that’s involved in
metabolizing estrogen, which is vital for keeping estrogen
and progesterone levels balanced. When the estrobolome
is out of whack, it can throw your hormones off balance
and cause you to retain fluids.
Chronic stress: As if you needed another reason to get out
of perpetual productivity mode, chronic stress is linked to
bloating. When your body produces excess amounts of
the stress hormone cortisol, it causes you to retain
sodium, which leads to water retention and
uncomfortable swelling.
Nutrient deficiencies: Not getting enough magnesium
could be one of the reasons you feel bloated. Magnesium
helps relax the muscles and eases constipation.
FLO-approved biohack: Support your microbiome with
probiotics and take a magnesium supplement, or try my Anti-
Bloatini juice recipe. Drink it every day of the week before
your luteal phase to prevent bloat and other PMS symptoms.
Anti-Bloatini
2 beets, 2 carrots, 4 celery stalks, 1 lemon
Juice everything, and serve immediately.
Worst foods for bloating: Caffeine, salty foods, and dairy.
Cut them out, especially before your period.
Acne
Do you tend to get a big zit during your period? Do little
bumps appear on other parts of your face during the other
times of your cycle? Or are you plagued with cystic acne as I
was? Acne can be demoralizing, robbing you of your
confidence. I hear from women every day who want help to
get rid of acne and blemishes. Dermatologists will prescribe
acne medication, and gynecologists will prescribe birth control
pills. But acne is caused by excess estrogen, the improper
metabolization of this hormone, gut dysfunction, and
micronutrient deficiencies—yes, the same causes of any
hormonal problem. Acne medication that treats your face
won’t get rid of the root cause, so those zits will keep coming
back. In addition, the side effects of acne medications can
include depression and liver and gut issues. Instead of
medicating, you can simply track your cycle and hormone
levels. Acne can be triggered during ovulation or when you’re
moving from the ovulation phase to the premenstrual phase.
Acne can also appear when your hormonal patterns change as
you age from your twenties to your forties.
FLO-approved biohack: Eat lots of leafy greens (my fave
breakout buster is cilantro) and root veggies to up your
vitamin A intake. Vitamin A is fat-soluble, so be sure to eat
your greens with healthy fats, such as olive oil or avocado.
Add more zinc to your diet by eating whole grains, sunflower
seeds, and tree nuts. Consume more essential fatty acids by
adding flaxseeds to your meals, and take fish oil and evening
primrose oil supplements.
Worst foods for hormonal acne: Dairy, soy, peanuts,
vegetable oils (canola, sunflower, and safflower), caffeine, and
gluten.
Breast Tenderness
In the days leading up to your period, do your breasts feel sore
and painful? If so, you’re one of legions of women who
experience this common PMS symptom. Premenstrual breast
tenderness, which is known as cyclical mastalgia, can be a
sign that you have excess estrogen circulating in your body.
When you have estrogen dominance, it leads to swelling of the
breast ducts. If your breasts feel lumpy before your period, it
could be a sign of fibrocystic breast disease and might merit a
trip to the gynecologist.
FLO-approved biohack: Load up on foods that are high
in vitamin E, including almonds, sunflower seeds, spinach,
chard, kale, avocado, mango, and kiwis. Vitamin E is a
powerful antioxidant that calms the inflammation that causes
breast tenderness. Consider taking an essential fatty acid called
evening primrose oil, which acts as an anti-inflammatory
agent.
Worst foods for breast tenderness: Kick all forms of
caffeine to the curb—including coffee, black tea, and green tea
—and dump dairy.
PMS biohacking guide: www.FLOliving.com/pms-guide.
Step 5: Replenish Your Micronutrients
Endocrine disruptors, synthetic birth control, and stress—these
all negatively impact your hormonal health. Sugar, dairy, and
gluten—staples in so many women’s diets—can mess with
your microbiome and prevent your body from adequately
absorbing nutrients. Cappuccinos, chai lattes, and energy
drinks—which many women rely on to power through their
day—deplete micronutrients. And don’t forget all that dieting,
overexercising, and rampant stress that further drain our
reserves. Mix them all together, and you’ve got one nasty
cocktail for micronutrient depletion and endocrine
dysfunction. Because we’ve been brought up without a
fundamental working knowledge of our biochemistry or how
to live in sync with our cycle, we try diets and engage in
exercise routines and self-care that actually deplete the body of
the very micronutrients the endocrine system needs to create
hormonal balance. So our hormones go off-kilter, causing us to
turn to yet another diet, fitness fad, or self-care ritual that only
compounds the problem. It’s a vicious cycle.
If you’re like the vast majority of American women, you
probably haven’t been nourishing your monthly cycle. You
may not be eating foods that provide enough of the
micronutrients your body needs to optimize endocrine function
throughout your cycle. Or you may be consuming nutrient-
dense foods, but your body can’t absorb enough of the
goodness they contain due to gut dysbiosis. Whatever the
reason, the result is the same—a lack of sufficient
micronutrients to keep your hormones happy. The risk for
vitamin deficiencies is significantly higher in women
compared with men, and can you guess who is at highest risk
for deficiency? Women ages nineteen to fifty and pregnant or
breastfeeding women—in other words, women of reproductive
age—are most likely to be missing out on micronutrients that
are vital to hormonal health. Vitamin deficiencies put you at a
greater disadvantage, keep you in hormonal dysfunction, and
prevent you from accessing the gifts of your feminine biology.
In addition to eating nutrient-dense foods, you may want to
add certain key supplements to the protocol. Science shows us
that using specific supplements can support the body in
achieving and maintaining hormonal balance. In a 2017
Nutrients study, people who didn’t use any dietary
supplements had a 40 percent risk of a vitamin deficiency,
compared with just a 14 percent risk for those taking
multivitamin and multimineral supplements. Don’t fall into the
trap of thinking that supplements can take the place of a
healthy, phase-specific eating plan—nutritious food always
comes first! And don’t expect one single supplement to solve
all your symptoms or to provide all the micronutrient support
you need. After years of practice and research, I have
identified the nonnegotiable micronutrients that your
endocrine system needs to balance your hormones. Think of
these micronutrients as a sort of “insurance policy” against
that harmful cocktail that is wreaking havoc with your
endocrine system. Learn more about these micronutrients here,
and find the formulations at
www.FLOliving.com/supplements.
B Vitamins
B vitamins are critical for hormonal health, in addition to
playing an integral role in your energy, moods, skin, and stress
response. Vitamin B6 is essential for the development of the
corpus luteum, which is formed when a follicle releases an
egg. The corpus luteum secretes progesterone and plays a vital
role in conception and maintaining a pregnancy. B vitamins
are also essential for your skin, helping your cells regenerate
and renew. B6 prevents skin inflammation and overproduction
of sebum, the oil your skin produces that can create acne
issues. Vitamin B5, also known as pantothenic acid, promotes
healthy functioning of the adrenal glands, which are
responsible for pumping out the stress hormone cortisol. A
2008 study showed that supplementing with B5 helps
stimulate adrenal cells, which in turn helps regulate your stress
response. This is one reason some people refer to B5 as the
“anti-stress vitamin.”
When B vitamin levels are low: Low levels of B6 can
translate to low levels of progesterone, which can trigger PMS
symptoms during the luteal phase and increase the risk of
miscarriage. Hormonal acne and adrenal fatigue are also
associated with insufficient levels of B vitamins.
B vitamin disruptors: Many everyday things—stress,
overexercising, alcohol, lack of sleep, and the pill—deplete B6
and subsequently, progesterone. Research has made it clear
that oral contraceptives impair microbiome health, which
prevents proper absorption of vitamins and can lead to
depletion.
Magnesium
Magnesium is magic for your hormones. It’s essential for
hormone creation, and also contributes to cortisol regulation,
thyroid function, blood sugar balance, and sleep. As if that
weren’t enough, magnesium also has a powerful anti-
inflammatory effect. This micronutrient is essential for
pituitary health and helps ensure that we produce optimal
amounts of hormones like FSH (follicular stimulating), LH
(luteinizing), and TSH (thyroid stimulating) for healthy
endocrine function. Magnesium encourages relaxation, calms
the nervous system, and promotes better sleep. Magnesium
also helps regulate your body’s stress-response system and
prevents excess cortisol production. When your stress
hormones are under control, the way is paved for
progesterone, estrogen, testosterone, FSH, and LH levels to
reach a happy balance as well. Magnesium helps keep insulin
production in check, which reduces sugar cravings. Fewer
cravings means less consumption of things like cookies and
cupcakes, which translates to fewer blood sugar spikes and
crashes. Keeping blood sugar stable is absolutely vital when it
comes to healing hormonal issues, such as PCOS. Thanks to
these benefits, magnesium can help heal PMS, PCOS, adrenal
fatigue, menopausal symptoms, and all other health problems
related to the hormone cycle.
When magnesium levels are low: Unfortunately, you
could be lacking in this all-important mineral. In all my years
working with women to balance their hormones, I haven’t met
a single woman who didn’t need to boost her magnesium
levels. People who don’t get enough magnesium are more
likely to have elevated levels of inflammation, which is
associated with endometriosis and the painful cramps that
come with it, breast tenderness, and acne. Other problems
associated with low levels of magnesium include irregular
ovulation, thyroid issues, excessive cortisol production, insulin
or diabetes, and trouble sleeping.
Magnesium disruptors: Many things can deplete levels,
but some of the most common are chronic stress, caffeine
consumption, and high sugar intake.
Omega-3 Fatty Acids
Mountains of evidence point to omega-3 fatty acids as potent
soothers of menstrual-related symptoms, mood boosters, stress
busters, anti-inflammation agents, and skin rejuvenators. They
can help ease symptoms related to PCOS, PMS, uterine
fibroids, breast tenderness, and acne. In fact, when it comes to
pain relief for menstrual cramps, taking omega-3 fatty acid
supplements, most commonly in the form of fish oil but also
found in vegan sources, is more effective than popping
ibuprofen, according to a 2001 study by Iranian scientists.
Omega-3 goes a long way in reducing perceived stress levels,
and many studies have shown that supplementation with
omega-3 may help ease depression.
When omega-3 levels are low: Low levels of omega-3
have been linked to many of the symptoms that come with
hormonal imbalances, as well as fatigue, trouble sleeping,
attention problems, dry skin, and achy joints. Low levels of
omega-3 fatty acids have been associated with a higher
incidence of depression and bipolar disorder.
Omega-3 disruptors: Eating a diet too high in omega-6
fatty acids, a type of essential fatty acid that is pro-
inflammatory, can offset the anti-inflammatory benefits of
omega-3. Foods high in omega-6 include vegetable oils
(including sunflower, corn, and soybean), salad dressings,
pizza, sausages, and potato chips.
Vitamin D3
Did you know the “sunshine vitamin” is actually a hormone?
This micronutrient supports the health of many of your
biological systems, including the brain, immune system, and
nervous system. Vitamin D3 also regulates insulin levels,
which helps stabilize blood sugar levels. It has also been
linked to mood, dopamine production in the brain, and
serotonin levels. Many women I meet are surprised to discover
that vitamin D3 is also closely tied to fertility. For example,
women with higher vitamin D3 levels are four times more
likely to conceive via IVF than women with low levels,
according to research in a 2012 issue of Human Reproduction.
Bringing D3 levels up into the normal range can change your
fertility story.
When vitamin D3 levels are low: A staggering 93 percent
of women dealing with infertility have below-normal levels of
vitamin D3, according to a 2008 study in Fertility and
Sterility. This same study linked low levels of the
micronutrient to an increased risk for PCOS. A low
concentration of vitamin D3 is also known to cause estrogen
dominance, which is the primary culprit behind many
hormonal issues. Low levels have also been associated with an
increased risk for depression.
Vitamin D3 disruptors: A lack of sunshine, a strict vegan
diet, or avoiding dairy products may contribute to an
insufficiency of vitamin D3.
Probiotics (Gut Bacteria)
I’m very pro-probiotics. These supplements contain billions of
friendly bacteria intended to promote a healthier microbiome.
A specific community of gut flora called the estrobolome
produces an enzyme that supports the metabolizing of
estrogen, essential for conception. Your gut is also an
important part of the elimination system that is vital in
ushering hormones, such as excess estrogen, out of the body.
When gut bacteria levels are low: If your microbiome is
out of balance, it can put you on the path to estrogen
dominance, weight gain, acne, diabetes, brain fog, cancer,
acne, and rosacea.
Gut bacteria disruptors: If you take medications
(including oral contraceptives), devour dairy, gobble up
gluten, or eat foods covered in pesticides, you disrupt this
hugely important bacterial balance. Imbalance in your
microbiome compromises your ability to eliminate excess
estrogen, which can significantly disrupt your reproductive
ability.
Antioxidants to Promote Liver Function
Liver function is vital for healthy hormone levels.
Antioxidants that support liver function include vitamin C,
selenium, and alpha-lipoic acid.
When liver function is low: If your liver isn’t doing its
primary job of detoxification optimally, it could mean your
body won’t flush out excess estrogen adequately, making you
vulnerable to estrogen dominance.
Liver function disruptors: Consuming large amounts of
refined sugar or drinking too much alcohol can take a toll on
your liver.
Hormone supplement guide:
www.FLOliving.com/supplement-guide.
Step 6: Address the Emotional Causes of
Your Symptoms
Did you know that our emotions, feelings, and the energy we
hold can play a part in the development of reproductive health
conditions? In Women’s Bodies, Women’s Wisdom, Dr.
Christiane Northrup asserts that there’s an emotional-
psychological component to menstrual disorders. I have found
this to be true with my clients and with myself. And although
it’s very important to look at the root causes of conditions
from a functional nutrition and biological standpoint, and to go
through all of the steps listed here to address those causes, it’s
just as important to make peace with some of the emotional
issues that may be contributing to your menstrual problems.
So far in this book, you’ve seen the biological and
neurochemical underpinnings of hormonal dysfunction.
You’ve grasped how trying to fit into a 24-hour world without
taking your 28-day clock into account has put you at a serious
disadvantage, and you’ve discovered how endocrine disruptors
and synthetic birth control assault your body and damage your
biological systems. Most important, you’ve seen how you can
use food and lifestyle changes to put your period problems
into remission and help you balance your hormones. Your
emotions are the final piece to the hormonal dysfunction
puzzle you may want to consider. Emotions are powerful, and
they can cause real physical changes. You feel nervous, your
hands get clammy. You feel scared, your heart starts to beat
faster. You feel anxious, your stomach hurts. Research shows
emotions can impact many of our biological systems—causing
neurochemical changes, suppressing our immune system, and
ramping up our stress response. It’s not surprising that
emotions may contribute to your period problems.
I find that emotions also need to be addressed for long-
term hormonal recovery. What do I mean? For example, take a
look at Sheri. She wanted help because she was experiencing
continuous spotting. We had addressed her diet and lifestyle,
but the spotting was still occurring. During one conversation
she mentioned to me that the spotting had been happening
since her father had passed away earlier that year. I suggested
that Sheri’s womb was holding her unprocessed grief, resulting
in the symptoms, which were a literal weeping from the
womb. Once she made that connection, she was able to release
her emotions and address her grief, and this symptom pattern
disappeared.
Think of your body having a “high heart” where your
actual heart is, and a “low heart” where your pelvic basin is;
the “low heart” holds on to your deepest emotions, the ones
you may not even be aware of. These feelings will remain
there until your “high heart” is ready to process them. A health
condition like spotting can convey a message of the kinds of
emotions being held in the reproductive organs. I see this in
many women who are trying to live in perpetual productivity
—being in never-ending go mode at work, in relationships,
and in motherhood. When you push at work without rest, do
what your partner wants but not what you need, and put your
children always ahead of your own self-care, those
unaddressed needs and feelings get stored in your pelvis. If
you aren’t creating space for yourself, your feelings, and your
needs, period problems will be the price you pay for martyring
yourself. Your cycle will shout it to the rooftops—cramps!
headaches! heavy bleeding! fibroids! breast tenderness! Listen
to your cycle. It’s trying desperately to tell you something you
need to hear. It’s asking you to acknowledge these emotions.
It’s begging you to take care of yourself.
In my practice, I have found that certain hormonal
conditions are speaking to you about specific emotional
realities. Take ovarian cysts, for example—especially ones that
are recurrent. They tend to represent unfulfilled creative
expression. Maybe you feel stifled in your creativity at work,
or maybe you don’t have the energy to get your projects to
blossom from the idea stage to fruition. This blocked creativity
can manifest as ovarian cysts, which serve as a painful
reminder that you must tap into the creative matrix. Look at
endometriosis. The emotional connection here tends to relate
to women who put all their energy toward caring for others
while ignoring their own needs and desires. The uterus
basically mirrors this behavior. Think of what the
endometrium represents. This lush uterine lining provides a
nurturing maternal cocoon for an embryo. When it grows
outside the womb, it does so in an attempt to embrace and
mother the woman who isn’t mothering herself. These
symptoms cannot be ignored, and they tell you that you can no
longer ignore yourself.
I believe the best way forward is to bring these emotions
out into the open, to talk about our traumas and the things we
don’t normally share openly—our individual experiences of
miscarriage, postpartum depression, abortion, sexual abuse,
rape, assault, and domestic violence, as well as the collective
weight of sexism and misogyny. Releasing these emotions can
mean we no longer hold them silently within ourselves, where
they continue to do harm. I believe that understanding the
emotional root of our hormonal issues can lead to more
compassion for ourselves and for other women, and to an
individual and collective recovery. Only through this
understanding and recovery can we feel safe to come home to
our bodies, and start living with our body’s rhythms at the
center of our lives.
To learn about the specific emotional root causes of your
condition, download the guide at
www.FLOliving.com/emotions-guide.
HOW TO GET IN THE FLO WHEN YOU
HAVE SPECIAL CIRCUMSTANCES
Perhaps cancer treatments may have left you without a
period. Or you may be a transgender woman who
doesn’t bleed. Or you have experienced premature
ovarian failure or have adrenal hyperplasia or some
other condition that is stopping your cycle. Adopting a
cyclical practice can help you feel connected to the
rhythm of the second clock. If you’re not sure where to
start, you have two options:
Start this week as your follicular week and go from
there.
Look up the moon phases for the current month and
chart your cycle according to its schedule: a full moon
indicates the ovulatory phase, a waning moon
represents the luteal phase, a new moon is the
menstrual phase, and a waxing moon represents the
follicular phase.
The idea is not that you’d do this with the intention
of restoring your cycle. Instead it’s a weekly practice
that allows you to tap into a constantly shifting self-
care practice and stay connected with creativity and
productivity rhythms based on feminine energy. You
can explore which aspects of the self-care practice give
you the greatest boost physically and emotionally.
What I hope you take away from this chapter is that
whatever your particular challenge might be—endometriosis,
fibroids, unresolved emotions—you have the power to change
your hormones in a positive way by taking the steps outlined
here. Understanding how to apply this practice to enhance
your own body and health gives you a strong foundation to
stand on. In part 3 of this book, you’ll discover how to take the
practice beyond your own personal well-being and make it
work for you in your career, relationships, motherhood, and
more.
Biohacking Tool Kit
Part 2
What to Know If You’re on Hormonal
Birth Control
You quite literally are your hormones. And when
you change your hormones—which is what
hormonal contraceptives do—you change the
version of yourself that your brain creates.
—DR. SARAH HILL
T
he one endocrine disruptor that may do the most harm is the
one we purposely choose to manipulate our hormones:
synthetic birth control. If you’ve read my first book,
WomanCode, or watched any of my Facebook live chats, you
probably know my feelings on synthetic birth control. Let me
be clear on my feelings: From a feminist point of view, I think
every woman should have access to birth control anytime she
wants. From a menstrual health point of view, period issues
need better care, which birth control does not provide. One of
my clients who took the pill for years to override a hormonal
imbalance told me it felt like she was “using a Band-Aid to
cover a deep wound that needed stitching.” I couldn’t have
said it better myself. Synthetic birth control doesn’t fix your
hormones and it doesn’t address any of the underlying root
causes of hormonal imbalance. It simply masks the symptoms
associated with conditions like estrogen dominance, PMS,
PCOS, endometriosis, and fibroids. Gynecologists routinely
prescribe synthetic birth control to treat or manage these
conditions as if it were a magic pill. Unfortunately, there is no
magic.
Here’s how those synthetic hormones really work to hijack
the four phases of your gorgeous cycle. Combinations of
estrogen and progestin, a synthetic form of progesterone,
conspire to interfere with your body’s natural processes. They
fool the brain so the hypothalamus never signals the pituitary
gland to secrete luteinizing hormone (LH) or follicle-
stimulating hormone (FSH), effectively preventing the
follicles from swelling to mature the eggs they contain. The
steady levels of synthetic hormones delivered by the pill
thwart the natural midcycle surge in estrogen that typically
kick-starts the release of an egg, so there is no ovulation. In
the unlikely event an egg manages to be released in spite of all
the synthetic hormones working against it, its chances of being
fertilized are slim. That’s because synthetic progestin thickens
the mucus of the cervix, creating a sort of barrier that makes it
harder for sperm to swim to an egg. In addition, unlike natural
progesterone, which maintains the thickened lining of the
uterus to make it inviting for a fertilized egg, progestin does
the opposite, by thinning the uterine lining. If an egg is
fertilized, the lining may be too thin for it to remain in the
uterus, and it will be shed when bleeding occurs. Many forms
of birth control pills try to mimic a natural monthly cycle with
three weeks of pills containing the synthetic hormones and one
week of placebos to make women feel as if they are still
getting a period and therefore feel more comfortable taking the
medication. During the placebo week, you typically
experience some breakthrough bleeding. Don’t be fooled: This
is not a real period! Since there is no ovulation, you have no
menstrual cycle.
This is a completely artificial pattern. Gone are the natural
rise and fall of estrogen and progesterone. In its place is a
static dose of synthetic hormones that basically keep you stuck
long-term in a phaseless no-cycle land. Some of you might
think, “Hey, that’s great. I can be more productive and get
more stuff done.” Slow down, sister. This is not the case. Your
estrogen levels are being suppressed, and you’re getting a very
low dose of progesterone that doesn’t provide enough
stimulation to the brain to fully mimic the luteal phase. So you
don’t have that fire to finish projects, and in fact, you’re more
likely to feel a little flat. You’re basically stuck in a hormonal
desert without access to the gifts of any of the four phases of
your cycle, which means you won’t have your inner creative
matrix helping you bring your ideas and projects to life. Over
time, the massive micronutrient depletion the pill causes will
lead to a whole host of problems for your biological systems.
This is a sure-fire way to burn out your adrenals, expose
yourself to chronic stress and systemic inflammation, and
increase your risk for autoimmune issues. Your body will pay
the price. I see women every day who are dealing with the
effects.
In my view, synthetic birth control has a huge opportunity
cost. It distances you from your inner feminine power source
and makes the HPO (hypothalamic pituitary ovarian) axis
dormant. Synthetic birth control also comes with a host of
nasty side effects (like shrinking your clitoris and ovaries),
reduces your body’s ability to absorb micronutrients, messes
with your mate selection on a genetic level, and robs you of
the opportunity to experience the magic that happens when
you’re in sync with your cycle.
I hear from women every day who are suffering from
taking the pill or using another form of hormonal
contraceptive. “I don’t feel like myself,” “I’m an emotional
mess,” “I’m so tired all the time,” and “I feel depressed” are
some of the more common complaints I hear. But these are
only a few of the many side effects facing women on the pill,
patch, ring, or hormonal IUD. Just look at the little
information pamphlet that comes with your hormonal birth
control prescription, and you’ll see a very long list of potential
birth control side effects. Women are not made aware of the
health risks associated with the manipulation of their
hormones through synthetic birth control methods. And
although the pill in particular has seen many changes since it
was first approved in 1960, many of the same potential side
effects remain. You’re probably well aware of the bloating,
headaches, and weight gain, but did you know that the pill can
also cause depression, shut down your sex drive long term,
and decrease your fertility even after you stop taking it?
Did your gynecologist tell you about all these risks before
writing a prescription for synthetic birth control? Probably not.
If you’re thinking about putting your daughter on the pill to
mask her period problems, take a long hard look at these side
effects and understand that with phase-specific foods and
exercise, she can have regular periods without the
consequences of hormonal birth control. And note that
although many of these side effects and conditions look like
individual problems, they may be signs of larger, systemic
issues.
How the Pill Impacts Your Biological Systems
Increasingly, research is revealing how synthetic birth
control can affect your (or your daughter’s) biological
systems.
Biological System 1: Brain. A 2014 review shows
taking the pill is associated with changes in the brain’s
structure, neurochemistry, function, and mood
modulation. Structural changes, which appear in brain
regions associated with emotion, increase the longer
you’ve been taking the pill, and some of them may not be
reversible. Those little round pills can also mess with the
intricate balance of your feel-good neurotransmitters—
serotonin, dopamine, and GABA—which may contribute
to mood swings, anxiety, or depression. Research from
the University of Copenhagen suggested synthetic birth
control could play a role in causing depression for some
women. The researchers found that compared with
women who weren’t taking hormonal contraceptives,
women taking birth control pills that contain both
estrogen and progestin were 23 percent more likely to
start using antidepressants for the first time. Even more
alarming, women using progestin-only pills were 34
percent more likely to get a first prescription for
antidepressants. Considering how many millions of
women take hormonal birth control at some point in their
lives, and the fact that women are taking it earlier with
the younger age of menarche, it’s critical for more
research to be done to explore the effects of synthetic
birth control on the brain.
Biological System 2: Immune system. Synthetic
hormones have a profound effect on the immune system.
A 2017 review of 352 studies found that using oral
contraceptives with estrogen and progestin is associated
with a greater risk for autoimmune diseases, including
multiple sclerosis, systemic lupus, and interstitial cystitis.
Progesterone-only contraceptives are linked to
progesterone dermatitis and, in one large developing
world concurrent cohort study, are associated with
increases in eczema, contact dermatitis, alopecia, acne,
and related skin conditions.
Biological System 3: Metabolism. Are you one of
those women who gains weight just thinking about taking
the pill? I’ve met thousands of women who have
experienced weight gain after starting the pill. The
reasons why remain a mystery. Numerous studies have
failed to show that hormonal birth control causes
significant weight gain; however, the estrogen in
contraceptives may cause you to feel less full after eating.
According to Dr. Mary Pritchard, the low-dose estrogen
in birth control increases the level of ghrelin, a hormone
that increases appetite. This change can cause you to eat
more, which is a sure-fire way to gain weight. Estrogen
also leads to added fluid retention, which can add pounds.
Taking the pill can also get in the way of your fitness
goals. A 2009 study in the FASEB Journal found that
women on the pill gain 60 percent less muscle mass than
women who are not taking oral contraceptives. In a ten-
week weight-training program, about half the participants
were on the pill and the other half were not. By the end of
the program, women who were on the pill had gained
significantly less lean muscle tissue, had lower levels of
hormones that build muscle, and had much higher levels
of cortisol, which is known to break down muscle tissue.
The pill is definitely not your workout buddy.
Biological System 4: Microbiome. The pill is your
microbiome’s worst enemy. It acts like an antibiotic in the
gut, destroying the delicate microbiome balance.
Bloating, constipation, nausea, irritable bowel syndrome,
acne, eczema, headaches—these common birth control
side effects may be signs of gut dysbiosis. The
mechanism behind these issues could be interference by
synthetic hormones with the ability of the hormone
receptors throughout the digestive system to function
normally. The science community is catching up to the
link between hormonal contraceptives and gut health. A
2013 study found that women on oral contraceptives for
more than five years are three times more likely to
develop Crohn’s disease.
Biological System 5: Stress response. Taking the pill
may cause effects in the body that mimic chronic stress,
increase levels of cortisol, and alter the HPA axis,
according to a 2017 study in Scientific Reports. Bottom
line: the pill can jack up your stress levels.
Having Options Is a Very Good Thing
When you look at all of these risks and the impacts on your
endocrine system, it makes you wonder: Is it all worth it? Do
you think men would be expected to endure these risks?
Apparently not. Although research shows over 50 percent of
men would be open to taking a hormonal contraceptive, and
their female partners say they would trust them to take an oral
“male pill,” there still isn’t a readily available product on the
market. A 2016 study showed a male hormonal contraceptive
injection was effective in preventing pregnancy, but the trial
was cut short due to male participants not being willing to
tolerate the side effects—mood swings, depression, acne, and
suppressed fertility post-trial, among others. Researchers
determined the risks outweighed the benefits and put a halt to
the study. These are some of the exact same side effects
women experience from taking hormonal birth control.
They’re also the kinds of complaints frequently dismissed or
downplayed by doctors—an excellent example of gender bias.
Why are we expected to endure the effects of hormonal
birth control, and why are we willing to subject ourselves to
these risks, especially when we can get pregnant for only a
maximum of seven days a month? Yes, you read that correctly.
You’re fertile only seven days a month—at most. This is due
to the length of time sperm survives in the body (five days)
and the egg is viable (two days). It’s much harder to get
pregnant than you’re led to believe. It’s not something you
need to be fearful of every day of your life to the point where
you need to take hormonal birth control on a daily basis. The
ills of the pill have been concealed for too long, and it’s time
to make choices based on health, not fear.
Now, don’t get me wrong—birth control is not all bad, and
in fact, it’s played a huge role in female empowerment. When
the pill debuted in 1960, it was viewed as the great
emancipator. It allowed women to finally take control of their
bodies and enjoy newfound sexual freedom, and it was a key
part of the women’s movement. I’m not ungrateful. I
completely agree that women must have access to birth
control, and we must have the right to make our own choices
regarding our bodies. However, having helped so many
women use a food and supplement protocol to restore
hormonal balance, I think it’s important for you to know that
there are other options for fixing your period and preventing
pregnancy that don’t force you to shut down your hormonal
system.
Millennials are taking the lead here. A 2018 survey of
more than 2,000 young women by Cosmopolitan and Power to
Decide, a national campaign to prevent unplanned
pregnancies, found that more than 70 percent of them said they
had stopped taking the pill or had thought about quitting in the
past three years. I talk with young women every day who are
doing yoga, juicing, drinking adaptogenic lattes, and eating
organic produce, and now they’re beginning to wonder how
synthetic hormones align with their overall values and
lifestyle.
Women of all ages need to understand that with synthetic
birth control, you’re giving up access to this powerful cyclical
process in your body. What I would love to see in our society
is women getting full disclosure about these medications,
learning about natural means of support, and then making the
decision they feel is right for them. Whenever I share all of the
information here with a client and then ask her if she would
have elected to take this medication to treat her hormonal
imbalance if she had known then what she knows now, the
answer is always a resounding no. I’ve met with thousands of
women who, once they understand the reality of the trade-off,
decide they want to go off the pill. I always let them know it’s
important to transition off the pill safely. More details on how
to transition off the pill without crazy side effects appear later
in this chapter.
Usually, when a woman makes the decision to come off
hormonal contraceptives, the next question I hear is, “If I go
off the pill, how am I going to prevent pregnancy?” Here are
some options.
Nonhormonal Birth Control Options
Condoms: When used correctly and consistently,
condoms are about 98 percent effective at preventing
pregnancy—about the same as the pill’s 99 percent
success rate when used perfectly. In addition, condoms
prevent sexually transmitted diseases (STDs), such as
human papillomavirus (HPV), as well as bacterial and
viral infections.
Diaphragm: A diaphragm is a small, flexible cup that is
inserted into the vagina. It prevents pregnancy by
covering the cervix so sperm are blocked from reaching
an egg. When used correctly, diaphragms are 94 percent
effective. A one-size-fits-all diaphragm called Caya
recently hit the US market. It’s available by prescription
only but doesn’t require a doctor to do a fitting.
Cervical cap: Similar to a diaphragm but smaller, a
cervical cap is a small cup shaped like a sailor’s cap that
covers the cervix to prevent pregnancy. Cervical caps,
such as FemCap, are 71 to 86 percent effective and work
best when used with spermicide.
Copper IUD: This tiny device is inserted into the uterus
and is more than 99 percent effective at preventing
pregnancy for up to twelve years. The copper IUD allows
you to continue ovulating, but it causes an inflammatory
response in the uterus that prevents sperm from reaching
the egg and fertilizing it and may interfere with
implantation. Note—this form can increase copper levels
in the body and increase the severity of cramps.
Intrauterine ball (IUBTM): Considered the next-
generation IUD, this string of copper pearls is inserted
into the uterus to prevent pregnancy for up to five years.
Like the copper IUD, it doesn’t prevent ovulation, but it
prevents egg fertilization and is more than 99 percent
effective. The unique shape also makes it less likely to
perforate the uterus, which is a major advantage.
Sponge: This small, squishy sponge contains spermicide
and is inserted into the vagina to cover the cervix. When
used perfectly each time you have sex, it’s 91 percent
effective at preventing pregnancy. You can use this along
with a condom during your fertile window for extra
pregnancy prevention.
Fertility awareness methods (FAMs): Being aware of
where you are in your cycle week to week can help you
track ovulation and pinpoint your fertile window to
prevent pregnancy. There are three ways to do so. You
can track your basal body temperature (BBT) with a
device like Daysy or Lady-Comp, observe changes in
your cervical fluid (it should look like uncooked egg
whites), or chart your cycle using a calendar or the
MyFLO app. Then avoid sex completely during your
fertile time, or use condoms plus a spermicide to be extra
safe. Individually, these methods are about 76 to 88
percent effective, but when all three are used together, the
prevention rate increases.
Wild carrot seed (also known as Queen Anne’s Lace):
This ancient herbal remedy has been used for centuries by
women to prevent the implantation of a fertilized egg into
the uterine wall. You can take wild carrot seed if you
have sex when you’re fertile and the condom breaks—
these things do happen! For more information on studies
and dosage, visit famed herbalist Robin Rose Bennet’s
website.
Can I Sync with My Cycle If I’m on the
Pill?
The short answer is no . . . and yes. You’ll do it in a slightly
different way from a woman who isn’t taking the pill. Because
the pill and other synthetic contraceptives shut down your
hormonal system, you lose your cyclical nature. Gone is the
follicular phase. No more ovulating. The low doses of estrogen
and progesterone put you in a phaseless cycle but without any
of the benefits. And the bleed you get during the placebo week
isn’t a real period. Even though you don’t experience the
natural ebb and flow of your hormones while on the pill, that
doesn’t mean you can’t try this cyclical program. Although
you’re missing out on all the gifts of your natural cycle, you
can still reap benefits from consuming nutrient-dense foods,
engaging in a variety of exercises, and scheduling your life
with right-timing in mind.
Here’s how you do it:
Map out on a calendar when you finish the last day of
your period.
Consider the following day the first day of your follicular
phase. Follow the follicular phase guidelines for seven
days.
The next day is your ovulatory phase. Follow the
ovulatory phase guidelines for four days.
The next day is your luteal phase. Follow the luteal phase
guidelines for twelve days.
The next day is your menstrual phase. Follow the
menstrual phase guidelines for five days.
Begin with the follicular phase again.
Experiment and see how you feel, but don’t expect to
experience the creativity, energy, productivity, or intuition that
comes with each phase when you’re not on the pill. My hope
is that you will want to have access to all the physical and
neurochemical opportunities that occur when your hormones
and biological systems are operating at optimal levels, so you
would make the decision to transition off the pill, and work
with your physician to do so. And if you do decide to
transition off, starting this process will help you transition
more successfully.
You Can Quit the Pill (or any Hormonal
Contraceptive) Without Crazy Side
Effects
Think back to why you started taking the pill. Was it just to
prevent pregnancy? Was it to regulate an irregular cycle? Was
it to “treat” symptoms of hormonal imbalance—severe PMS,
heavy cramps, migraines? As you understand now, the pill
doesn’t actually correct the root causes of any hormonal
condition, so be aware that when you come off these synthetic
hormones, all those unpleasant symptoms will come back, and
often times with a vengeance. Post–birth control syndrome is
real and can wreak short-term havoc and create long-term
problems if the transition isn’t handled properly. I hate to
break it to you, but even if you didn’t have any issues prior to
going on the pill for pregnancy prevention, quitting can cause
hormonal upheaval and bring on symptoms you never had
before. It’s so unfair. To avoid this, follow the steps outlined in
the Biohacking Tool Kit—remove endocrine disruptors, use
foods to fight your symptoms, replenish your micronutrients,
and track your symptoms. Follow these steps for two months
while you’re still on the pill, and then you can improve your
chance of transitioning without experiencing an intense relapse
of your symptoms. Stopping abruptly is never the way, and I
highly recommend that you let your gynecologist know about
your plans so you can be monitored by your physician as you
make the transition. Taking this approach can make the
changeover much gentler. When you begin to experience what
it feels like to have balanced hormones that allow you to
access your natural gifts, you may decide that you want to
continue on this path. It’s really up to you.
This is how Shawna did it. She originally started using
hormonal contraceptives—a vaginal ring that’s inserted once a
month—in part to take care of terrible acne. It seemed to flare
up at all the wrong times and made her feel self-conscious at
work and on the dating scene. Her acne had cleared up while
on birth control, and the first time she came off it, she said her
face “exploded.” So she went right back on it. The next time
she made the decision to stop hormonal birth control, she was
nervous about the acne coming back. This time she started
syncing with her cycle a few months before her big quit day,
and after she stopped her skin stayed completely clear. She
couldn’t believe it. Now she says she wishes she had started
this practice seven years earlier instead of hiding and
medicating the problem using birth control.
Get more support about synthetic birth control at
www.FLOliving.com/birth-control-rehab.
FOUR STEPS TO GET IN THE FLO
To recap how you can begin to get in the FLO, these
are the four simple steps to follow:
1. Audit your period.
2. If you have hormonal problems, read the Biohacking
Tool Kit section and follow the directions in it.
3. Keep it simple when easing into syncing with your
cycle by adding more phase-specific foods and
activities as you progress:
Week 1: Choose vegetables recommended for
this phase.
Week 2: Add the other phase-specific foods into
your meals.
Week 3: Use the recommended cooking methods
for each phase.
Week 4: Add in some phase-specific workouts.
4. In the following weeks, continue building on the
progress you’re making by including more elements
of the program.
Part 3
Getting Your Life in the FLO
Don’t think about making women fit the world—think about
making the world fit women.
—GLORIA STEINEM
Chapter 7
Sustainable Success at Work
I believe when you put women in any equation, the equation
gets better.
—SHELLEY ZALIS
N
ow that you’ve seen how to weave the concept of syncing with your
cycle into your personal life and time management, how do you apply the
concept in the workplace? How do you incorporate your second clock
into our corporate culture, which has been operating on a single clock for
centuries? First, think about how you’ve been faring so far by ignoring
your second clock and trying to fit in to that single-clock culture. Have
you ever noticed that you feel completely different at work from week to
week? Some weeks you’re excited about going to networking events and
giving presentations, but other weeks you’d rather hole up in your office
and organize your invoices for your expense reports. If you’re like most
women, you probably work in an environment that doesn’t honor your
infradian rhythm and doesn’t give you the freedom to manage your
projects in a way that works with your innate rhythm. You’re just
supposed to do whatever is asked of you whenever it’s asked. And just as
our cultural conditioning has us believing that we are supposed to suffer
with period problems, it also has us convinced that we are supposed to
suffer in every other area of our lives, especially work. So you put your
head down, dig in, and get the job done—buying in to the perpetual
productivity notion that the only way to succeed is to work harder, put in
longer hours, and sacrifice your personal life and self-care for the sake of
the job.
Whether you’re just beginning your career and still trying to figure
out what you want to do with your life, climbing the corporate ladder,
running your own business as I do, or dealing with the roller-coaster
freelance life, you’re probably feeling stretched to the limit. You might
be taking on extra projects at the office in the hope of getting a
promotion. You might have a side hustle in addition to your regular gig
to pad your portfolio and hopefully land a better job. You might be
spending nights and weekends on a passion project that could be your big
break. But if you’re sacrificing your well-being as a result of all the extra
work, you won’t be able to perform your best. When you don’t have the
bandwidth to devote to each of those projects, you can wind up making
mistakes or turning in subpar work. Even worse, you could wear down
your immune system, get sick, and have to take a short leave of absence.
I’ve seen many women get so frustrated by the frenzy of nonstop
productivity at work that they eventually think there’s something wrong
with the company, and they find a new job or switch careers only to get
caught up in the same relentless pace again.
The truth is, our hormonal changes throughout the month play a role
in our communication, creativity, energy, and productivity at work.
Everything you do that focuses on managing your time rather than your
energy and that isn’t in sync with your cycle phases increases stress,
dampens your energy, and slows your progress, making you feel
pressured and unfulfilled in your job. But what if I told you it doesn’t
have to be this way? You don’t have to ignore your second clock at work
or get stuck in nonstop productivity mode. In this chapter, you’ll discover
how to tap into your monthly cycle in the work environment so you can
optimize your work flow, unlock your creative process, and feel
energized about your career.
That’s what happened to Allie. This entrepreneur used to travel a lot
for work. Whenever she was at home or on the road, she did what she’d
always done—started the day with an intense workout, drank a smoothie
followed by a big mug of coffee, and then worked all hours of the day,
and attended dinners and networking events most nights. At home she
would squeeze in time with her boyfriend, too. All of this in between
cross-country or international flights—nothing had a rhythm; it was just
go, go, go, no matter what time zone or cycle phase she was in.
Inevitably, her period problems and symptoms got worse. She was
looking for a way to feel good and live her dreams, and it was becoming
clear that she wasn’t getting away with taking shortcuts with her health
or her projects.
When she started tuning in to her cyclical energy, everything
changed. “Now I make sure I’m not just wiping myself out in the
beginning of the day with intense workouts in the morning without
enough sleep and just powering through,” she says. “Instead, it’s making
me more productive at work because it’s ensuring that I’m not burning
the candle at both ends, which was really my experience before. I’m so
thankful I’m feeling like I cracked the code on myself and knowing
what’s appropriate for me.”
Reset the Corporate Clock
If you think it sounds like I’m advocating for some special, unusual
accommodation for our infradian pattern, keep in mind that
accommodating the male single clock hormonal pattern is the status quo.
In fact, corporate culture is set up to optimize performance for male
biological rhythms. Check out the typical workday described here.
Typical Workday on the 24-Hour Clock
Morning: Testosterone and cortisol are at their highest, which makes
men efficient at getting stuff done—holding meetings and powering
through projects.
Late afternoon: Testosterone is waning, making men more sensitive to
their estrogen, which sparks a desire in men to connect through
socializing, such as going to happy hour with clients or coworkers.
Evening: Testosterone is at its lowest, which makes men want to crawl
into their man cave and power down for the day.
I’m not recommending that we do something radical here; I’m simply
suggesting we acknowledge and make space for both realities so
everyone can thrive equally. Historically, women have had to disconnect
from our biochemical nature to fit in. How can we forget the women in
the 1960s and 1970s who worked hard to earn a seat at the male table by
downplaying their female-ness? We saw this suppression reflected in the
fashion trends of the 1980s—have you seen pictures of those “power
suits”?—and even in the shifting of our own beliefs that our biology is a
liability that must be overcome in the pursuit of success. They did the
absolute best they could do to gain access in an unfair environment. It’s
because of their sacrifices that we can envision even more for ourselves
now. The fact is that corporate culture acknowledges only one biological
rhythm, and ours deserves to be included now.
Would working in tune with our infradian clock somehow set us
back? I would argue that this is an important next step in the evolution of
a corporate culture that began and developed without envisioning a day
when women might be part of the landscape. Women often feel forced to
leave the workplace because it continues to refuse to acknowledge our
different but equal needs—think maternity care, sustainable hours, and
wellness programming. The disconnect with our cycle is taking a toll. In
fact, a growing number of women are leaving the workforce altogether.
Since 1999, when female employment peaked at 77 percent, it has
declined to less than 74 percent among women of reproductive age—
about twenty-five to fifty-four, according to a 2017 New York Times
article. About one in five women are opting for part-time work for
noneconomic reasons—things like childcare, family obligations, and
health issues—compared with about one in ten men, according to 2016
data from the US Bureau of Labor Statistics. Women are also turning
away from corporate jobs in favor of entrepreneurship, starting new
businesses at a rate higher than men. In a 2018 report from SCORE that
drew on data from more than 20,000 small business owners, 47 percent
of women said they had launched a new business within the past year
compared with 44 percent of men. A desire for flexibility in their
professional and personal lives ranked among the top reasons cited for
choosing to start a business. “Creating balance and control over my own
schedule was paramount for me as a mom to two young kids,” said one
of the study respondents.
Quitting or starting your own business aren’t the only options. The
more we take up space instead of trying to fit into the existing cultural
norm, the more we create policy, and the more we normalize our
biorhythmic differences, the sooner we can reimagine a work experience
that not only accepts our biological reality, but that also creates a more
sustainable human work environment as we race toward a future where
AI and “always on” will challenge us even further. We’ve sought to
eradicate gender bias with sexual harassment policies, hiring laws, and
more, and we should push further here. But we can’t wait for the
corporate world or government agencies to do it for us. We have to be the
change we wish to see. When you embrace this paradigm it will impact
not only your own effectiveness from a personal professional standpoint,
but also that of your team and your business, creating momentum to both
reach your goals sustainably and change the culture.
Put Your Cycle to Work for You
How can you harness your cyclical nature to get into the flow and be
your most productive and powerful self? First, remember you’re not the
same week to week, so stop expecting to work that way. Second, discard
the cultural conditioning that has led us to believe that our hormones
have a negative impact on our capabilities at work. Although our
hormones can affect the way we think, feel, and relate to others, and
influence what we’re naturally interested in and stimulated by, there is
not one single day or week when women are not just as capable as men
in every work-related capacity. Yes, we are creatures of our chemistry,
just like men are, but our cycle doesn’t dictate that we have to lose a
week each month to PMS and your period. It just means that by noticing
these shifts and scheduling your days to work with your hormones, you
can make your hormones work for you to help you sustain your energy,
creativity, and productivity regardless of the demands on your schedule.
Work smarter, not harder, by playing to your dominant interests based on
your cycle phases. Here are the job-related strengths you possess during
the four phases of your cycle, and how you can be a total boss during
each one.
PHASE 1: PREPARE
Follicular Phase: 7–10 Days
Cyclical Strengths: Creativity and Planning
As estrogen rises during the follicular phase, it boosts the brain’s working
memory capability—the ability to handle complex processing tasks,
according to research in Frontiers in Science. That’s why you should
schedule your most mentally challenging assignments for this week since
estrogen’s effect on your brain improves your ability to solve problems,
strategize, and plan. Hormonal levels during this phase also spark
creativity, making this the ideal time to focus your energy on new
projects at work, starting a new business, or going after new clients.
Engage in brainstorming sessions with your coworkers to take advantage
of the boost in your cognitive creativity.
PHASE 2: OPEN UP
Ovulatory Phase: 3–4 Days
Cyclical Strengths: Communication and Collaboration
Surging estrogen during the ovulatory phase increases synaptic
connections, which can boost mental sharpness, creativity, and
communication skills, according to a study in the Journal of
Comparative Neurology. Connecting with others is at the heart of this
phase. This is the time to have important conversations with your team,
your boss, or your clients. If you are able to schedule key conversations
during the ovulatory phase, your heightened communication skills will
allow you to convey your thoughts and opinions more clearly, as well as
to be more receptive to those of others. If you’re planning to ask for a
promotion or a raise, or give that big presentation, do it during your
ovulatory phase. Harness your communication powers to work on your
marketing and advertising messaging, write a month’s worth of blogs for
your social media pages, or post a video of yourself giving a talk. Your
physical energy is at one of its highest points during your ovulatory
phase. Emotionally, you feel outgoing, upbeat, and revitalized. Tap into
this energy by slotting lunches, client meetings, and after-work
networking for this time.
PHASE 3: WORK
Luteal Phase: 10–14 Days
Cyclical Strengths: Completion, Nurturing, and Tending
As the corpus luteum expands and then is reabsorbed, your energy begins
to focus and turn inward. You’ll notice that you have the desire to get
things done, making the luteal phase an ideal time to take care of work
tasks. The particular ratio of estrogen to progesterone in this phase makes
you notice things around you that you didn’t see before. As a result, your
brain begins to prioritize detail-driven responsibilities you may have
ignored all month, such as putting together your quarterly report,
finalizing contracts, or editing marketing content. You’ll also have a
natural desire to wrap up projects and bring things to completion. On the
social side, try slowing down your networking and outside meetings
during your luteal phase, so you won’t feel needlessly exhausted and so
you have time to do what feels most pleasurable to you this phase—
which is getting your work done.
PHASE 4: REST
Menstrual Phase: 3–7 Days
Cyclical Strengths: Evaluation, Analysis, and Intuition
Analysis and evaluation are dominant desires now. During your
menstrual phase, the communication between the right and left
hemispheres of your brain is more powerful than at any other time. This
communication enables you to judiciously evaluate how you’re doing in
your career or with a project and, if necessary, to begin identifying and
making course corrections that will reposition you in the direction you
want to be heading. Ask yourself how you performed in the previous
month. Did you feel energetic and happy about your work, or
overwhelmed and underappreciated? Are you working on the kinds of
projects that excite you, or are you feeling uninspired at work? Is your
career headed in the right direction and, if not, what are some steps you
can take to veer it toward your overall goals? Use this time of the month
to reassess your career goals. Do you still want the same things as last
month or last year, or have you developed a new interest in following
another path? Because of the way your hemispheres are firing back and
forth during your period, you’re also most likely to receive clear
intuitive-gut messages during this phase. Check in. Listen to those subtle
messages. Are they telling you a proposed project at work is a
nonstarter? Are they indicating that one of two potential hires is the right
one for the job? Are they screaming that your job is going nowhere, and
it’s time to start looking for a new gig? Pay attention! Use your female-
centered planner to jot down what your gut is telling you each month.
You may find that after a few months go by, your intuition during this
phase is reinforcing certain thoughts you’ve had in general—whether
those thoughts are about changing jobs, changing careers, venturing out
on your own as an entrepreneur, or knowing that you’re already in the
best place for you. Many women feel restless or dissatisfied during their
period. Are those feelings caused by low levels of hormones during this
phase, or is this your gut’s way of telling you to make some changes in
your life? When you optimize your hormonal patterns with the phase-
based practices you’re learning about, you’ll be able to clearly
understand what you need rather than feeling uncertain. Sometimes you
need more rest; other times you need a bigger change. By decreasing the
lag time in understanding and addressing your needs, you gain time to
start living your best life sooner rather than later. And by tuning in and
trusting your instincts, you can then take action in the next set of phases
to work toward your vision.
For Katja, who owns a growing company, planning business
initiatives and projects around her cycle keeps her fueled with energy and
excitement for her work. “I use the Cycle Syncing Method™ to run my
company to my best ability by not letting myself get run down,” she says.
“By organizing things based on priority level and my cycle phase, it
makes it easier to keep things running smoothly.” She says planning
according to her cycle keeps her in a creative groove, seeing projects
come to life and building her business in an intentional and purposeful
way rather than simply reacting to the latest crisis.
The Cycle Syncing Method™: Work FLO
FOLLICULAR OVULATORY LUTEAL Duration: MENSTRUAL
Duration: 7–10 Duration: 3–4 10–14 Days Duration: 3–7
Days Creativity Days Administrative Tasks Days
Communication Evaluation
and Intuition
Start new Have important Handle administrative Evaluate the
projects. conversations. tasks. past month.
Review your
Brainstorm with Ask for a raise Organize monthly
coworkers. or a promotion. desk/office/paperwork. planner and
notice patterns.
Ask yourself if
Tackle
Go on job Devote time to deep you like the
challenging
interviews. work. projects you’re
mental tasks.
working on.
Ask yourself if
Write blogs and Review documents,
your career is
Problem solve. craft marketing contracts, and
heading in the
copy. financial reports.
right direction.
Analyze project
Seek out new Post on social File expense account
data and
clients. media. reports.
reports.
Attend
Research new Reassess your
networking Order supplies.
ideas. career goals.
events.
Make plans for Negotiate deals. Wrap up projects. Listen to your
the month gut instincts.
ahead.
Give talks and Help your team meet Take frequent
Make decisions.
keynotes. deadlines. breaks.
Go to happy Take a personal
Organize computer
Dream big. hour with clients day (if
files.
or colleagues. possible).
Planning your work schedule around your cycle sounds great, but
what if you have to do something that is out of sync with your cycle
phase because of a project deadline? First, remember that you can do
anything in any phase—you’re infinitely creative, communicative,
collaborative, and more—but there is a natural ebb and flow to these
energies. Working with your cyclical strengths infuses you with more
energy, so you have more time to focus on the things you want to do and
have energy to spare to handle those time-sensitive projects. So it’s fine
to do tasks that are out of sync with your cycle, but they will create a
slightly bigger energy drain on your system. Just practice what you
learned in chapter 6 about boosting your self-care on those days to
compensate for this energy drain.
Do You Have to Tell Everyone at Work About
Your Hormones?
How exactly do you incorporate a cyclical practice at work? Do you have
to be in sync with all your female colleagues in order to get anything
done? Does it mean you have to let all your coworkers know where you
are in your cycle at all times? Do you have to put up a menstrual chart on
your office door that says, “I’m in the ABC phase. My strengths this
week are XYZ.” No! Engaging your second clock at work can be a silent,
internal process. Men certainly don’t go around telling their coworkers in
the morning that their testosterone levels are peaking so it’s time to have
a meeting, do they? Of course not. To give you an idea of what engaging
your infradian clock looks like, let me show you how it works at my
company, FLO Living. I typically like to schedule strategic planning
meetings when I’m in my follicular phase and ready to embark on new
ideas. I might excitedly introduce five new projects, definitely biting off
more than we can chew in a month. My marketing director might be in
her menstrual phase—a time for evaluation and course correction—and
will diplomatically let me know that the last time we took on five new
projects at one time it wasn’t very efficient. So we may narrow it down to
one or two new initiatives. Our operations manager might be in her luteal
phase—ideal for detail-oriented tasks—and will enthusiastically map out
a list of necessary duties by department to make the new projects a
success. And our social media manager might be in the ovulatory phase
—when you’re a communications star—and will share her vision for the
best ways to share the new project with our wonderful community on
social media. Because we’re all in different phases of our cycle, we each
bring different and necessary aspects to the meeting. It’s actually better if
our cycles are not synced up. This way, we get more diverse viewpoints.
If we were all in the follicular phase at the same time, we might rally
around all five new project ideas without pausing to consider that it
might be too much to take on at once and not get down to the brass tacks
of how to make them happen. In a follicular foray, the result might be
lots of great ideas without the follow-up to bring them to fruition. I
schedule meetings with people when it works for my cycle phases, and
they do the same; we all benefit from not being in the same phase and
move forward more efficiently—a truly unique way to collaborate.
The big takeaway here is that you don’t have to worry where your
female colleagues are in their cycles, and you don’t have to tell anyone
what phase you’re in. Just support your own cycle and bring the best of
your phase into meetings, brainstorming sessions, and your daily work-
flow. When each individual increases her own awareness of her
biological rhythms, collectively leveraging that awareness will create a
much more efficient process for everyone.
HONOR YOUR BUSINESS AND PROJECT CYCLES,
TOO
If you’re a “solopreneur,” business owner, or C-level exec, you’ll
notice that businesses and projects are cyclical, too. Like all
things in nature, they follow the creation matrix—initiation,
growth, completion, rest. Many companies go through periods of
rapid expansion, then contraction. You might have high-revenue
seasons followed by lower-income phases. With your projects,
you may go through phases when you are building and launching
new products, and phases when you evaluate performance and
focus on new customer acquisition rather than product
innovation. Working with these phases helps keep your projects
and your business focused and moving forward. Most successful
businesses do not do many things at the same time. Instead, they
focus on one initiative for a month or a quarter and then move on
to the next big idea. The fastest way to fail in business or with a
project is to multitask, overextend your resources, and fall short
of your goals. Just as it is on a personal level when you sync with
your own cycle, you can gain so much insight on a business level
from letting projects have space and time to evolve and go
through their growth cycles.
Redefine What Success Means for You
In spite of the concrete findings in favor of right-timing, it can still be
difficult to resist the cultural conditioning that says you should work
constantly to reach your career goals. Even after so many years of living
in sync with my cycle and engaging my feminine energy, I can still get
sucked back into that male paradigm and perpetual productivity mindset.
For example, when we were working on the launch of the MyFLO app, I
overextended myself. I was super excited about bringing this idea to life,
because WomanCode readers had been asking for it for years, and
because it makes it so much easier for women all over the world to adopt
the Cycle Syncing Method™. I was so immersed in prepping for the
launch with my team and powering through my to-do list that I went too
long between meals, started feeling the effects of blood sugar ups and
downs, and overworked my stress response system. I ended up getting a
nasty cold, which forced me to return to the basics of the practice. I’m
grateful my body shares her feedback on what I might be doing that isn’t
in my best interest.
I went back to syncing my food and exercise with my cycle and using
my planner—the three key tools I use to get myself back on track fast.
Thanks to this biohacking triage, I bounced back pretty quickly with
renewed focus and energy. We shifted some of the launch strategy. I
delegated more to my team. To make sure it didn’t happen again, I made
notes in my planner to remind myself to eat so I wouldn’t fall into that
starve-crash-burnout pattern again, and reprioritized my self-care,
especially during times of intense stress. Now a successful launch or
project means the whole experience is positive and spacious for me and
my team.
You may occasionally find yourself getting sucked back into the old
patterns we’ve been conditioned to follow. If this happens, don’t be too
hard on yourself. Listen to your body, biohack like a boss, and go back to
working with your cycle so it will start working for you again. Your body
provides the ultimate inner blueprint to your career success, as well as
your success in every other area of your life. But it’s important to
remember success doesn’t necessarily mean perpetually chasing goal
after goal, sprinting up the corporate ladder, or sacrificing your personal
life for your work. Anything that costs you your health, relationships, or
happiness isn’t really success. Just as you shouldn’t be forced to suffer
with period problems due to hormonal imbalances, you shouldn’t have to
suffer or make yourself sick to get ahead in the workplace. Fine-tune
your own picture of career success. What does it look like to you? What
is the most sustainable path for you? What would make you most happy?
When you have a clear image of what career success is for you, make it
happen and own it!
Six Steps for Cyclical Planning at Work
Now that you’ve seen the basics of how you can incorporate cyclical
planning into a work environment that caters to the single clock, follow
these six steps to keep building energy, stay in the flow, and maximize
your creativity.
1. Do an end-of-month review. Set aside some time to look ahead at
what’s coming up with work deliverables.
2. Map out your cycle phases and slot projects in where you have the
flexibility to do so.
3. Put in nonnegotiable deadlines wherever they fall in your cycle
phases.
4. Remove some nonessential tasks from that phase and plan one self-
care upgrade to compensate for the work that isn’t in sync with your
cycle.
5. Schedule all of your team meetings, and remind yourself to focus on
bringing a point of view that is based on the strengths associated
with that cycle phase to the conversation.
6. Encourage your coworkers to become aware of this as a team.
Lead like a Woman
Women are wired to lead in a unique way, and we can lead a change in
the workplace by living and working in sync with our infradian clock.
It’s not just me saying this. Emerging research says so. A growing
number of studies show it’s a good idea to embrace your feminine energy
in the workplace. In fact, tapping into your natural strengths is your
secret strategy to achieving more with less effort. Being a woman in the
workplace isn’t a disadvantage; it’s a huge benefit.
In 2014, leadership consultancy firm Zenger Folkman reviewed about
sixteen thousand leaders, one-third of whom were women, to assess
leadership effectiveness. In terms of overall leadership effectiveness,
women outranked men 54.5 percent to 51.8 percent. When women and
men were rated on sixteen leadership competencies—including taking
initiative, displaying high integrity and honesty, practicing self-
development, inspiring and motivating others, collaborating, and
communicating powerfully—women scored higher than the men on
twelve of them.
In their fascinating book The Athena Doctrine, bestselling authors
and researchers John Gerzema and Michael D’Antonio set out to
determine whether people are beginning to place greater value on female-
centric traits and characteristics. The authors surveyed sixty-four
thousand people in thirteen countries, and the results will blow your
mind. Worldwide, 66 percent of people agree that the world would be a
better place if men thought more like women. When it comes to
leadership, typically female characteristics like collaboration and sharing
credit are valued more than masculine traits like aggression and control.
Other traits generally considered to be feminine—intuition, empathy,
flexibility, and collaboration—were listed as desirable among leaders.
And a majority of people cited traditionally feminine traits, including
being creative, flexible, community-oriented, adaptable, giving,
generous, cooperative, and nurturing, as essential to success. Overall, the
authors discovered, “The countries with higher levels of feminine
thinking and behavior also have higher per-capita GDP and higher
reported quality of life.” The World Happiness Report 2018, which
ranked 156 countries across six factors, confirms these findings. The six
factors used to gauge happiness include traditionally feminine traits, such
as social support and generosity, as well as GDP, healthy life expectancy,
freedom to make life choices, and freedom from corruption. The top five
happiest countries, according to the report, are Finland, Norway,
Denmark, Iceland, and Switzerland.
Still thinking you need to follow male patterns to succeed in your
career? I’m going to let you in on something I’ve known intuitively for
years: teams perform better when they include female members.
Scientists proved it in 2010 when they administered intelligence tests to
699 people and then divided them into teams of two to five. Each team
had to tackle a series of challenges, including brainstorming, problem
solving, and decision-making—typical work stuff. The researchers gave
each team a collective intelligence score based on their performance.
Surprisingly, the teams with the highest individual IQ scores didn’t get
the top collective IQ scores. Teams with the most women on them
notched the best collective IQ scores. It’s compelling to imagine what
additional benefits would arise from more women bringing their cyclical
awareness, project management, and self-care into their work
environment.
Who Runs the World? Women!
If we model a shift to a more sustainable career that nourishes and
reenergizes us instead of draining us, we can inspire our coworkers to
adopt a similar way of working. Women are powerful influencers, and
I’m not just talking about on social media. Here in the United States,
women are the nation’s biggest consumers, and we drive the majority of
buying decisions for our households. Statistics prove it. We control more
than 50 percent of all personal wealth in the nation, and our purchasing
power amounts to a staggering $5–$15 trillion annually. Returning to a
work-life pattern that’s in sync with our biochemistry’s natural rhythms
might be so influential it could shift our corporate and entrepreneurial
culture to support this sustainable work model. Working based on both
the 24-hour clock and the 28-day clock could ultimately drive up
creativity and productivity, similar to the way Google’s introduction of
the campus office concept sparked companies to reevaluate office design,
work culture, and corporate community. Syncing with our infradian clock
may drive an even bigger conversation about how we can all live on this
planet in a more sustainable way. Heal your hormones, do less, achieve
more, enhance your personal happiness . . . save the planet. It’s certainly
worth a try.
The Future Is Female
Women are leading the charge to change the workplace in so many ways
—demanding the end of sexual harassment and gender bias. Many
companies have heard our demands and are making a commitment to
gender equality, taking steps to narrow the wage gap, creating sexual
harassment policies, and investing in corporate wellness programs to the
tune of $8 billion a year. That investment can pay off. For every dollar
companies spent on wellness programs, they see their absenteeism costs
drop by $2.73 and medical costs fall by close to $3.27, according to a
2010 analysis in Health Affairs. These changes are promising, but there’s
one more piece that will move the needle—acknowledging a woman’s
infradian rhythm. In the space of being safe and free to work how we
want, perhaps we can finally begin to include our reality in work culture.
In other countries, women’s hormonal health is taken into
consideration. For example, did you know that in some countries, such as
India, South Korea, and Japan, women are allowed to take the day off for
“menstrual leave” if they have painful periods? And that in the UK,
women receive a full year of paid maternity leave? In the US, the Family
and Medical Leave Act entitles women to only twelve weeks of unpaid
leave. A growing number of major US firms, however, offer greater
incentives to attract and retain female employees, especially at the
management level. Google provides women with mentoring groups like
Google Women in Engineering and Women@ Google, gives new moms
five months of paid maternity leave, and allows for flexible hours and
work-from-home options. Global consulting firm Deloitte boasts
women’s leadership development programs, women mentors, and
flexible scheduling. At health care company Johnson & Johnson, a
women’s leadership initiative aims to promote female employees from
within the company and offers other female-friendly perks.
Corporate America is starting to wake up to the fact that we need to
address women’s needs in the workplace. I’m encouraged by the
corporations that have invited me to share this message with their
employees about how reenvisioning success and productivity through a
female lens could unlock our competitive edge. Teams are simply
engaging the Cycle Syncing Method™ themselves. It doesn’t cost
anything to implement or require any corporate policy changes. I was
really thrilled to be the first woman to speak about female biohacking at
the 2018 SXSW conference. Until I hit the stage before a packed
audience, not a single presenter had ever broached the subject of how
getting in tune with our 28-day clock is the key to women thriving in
their bodies and in the workplace. This watershed moment made clear
that corporations need to acknowledge our second clock and women need
a new paradigm to define productivity and success in the workplace.
If you’re a corporate leader, small business owner, or entrepreneur,
pay attention to how this applies to your own workplace. Think about
what you’re offering and also what you’re modeling for your employees.
If you’re running yourself ragged, your female employees will be
compelled to do so, too, and they’ll be more likely to fall victim to
hormonal problems, health issues, mental fatigue, and burnout.
Ultimately, these employees will be less satisfied and more inclined to
jump ship. Considering that women make the workplace smarter, more
effective, and more profitable, think about how important it is to respect
their hormone reality. We know bioindividualism is the future in
medicine: biohacking at work will drive individual and corporate growth.
Biohacking for women at work will offer them a paradigm to define
productivity and success on their own terms. We have to make the work
environment work for us to include our needs around health, maternity
leave, and motherhood. Here at FLO Living, we’re operating at max
efficiency and peak performance because the women who work here are
in the zone and happier. A positive work environment fosters success—a
win-win for everyone.
With all of this overwhelming evidence, it’s clear that letting your
feminine side shine can help you achieve sustainable career goals.
Following the natural rhythms of your cycle and scheduling your days in
tune with your internal biological clock gives you a competitive
advantage. And by supporting the monthly hormonal changes that impact
the way you think, make decisions, and create during each phase of your
cycle, you will bring the best of yourself at all times to all that you do.
By learning to focus on doing one thing at the ideal time rather than
trying to do everything at once, you will become more efficient, get into
flow mode more often, and boost your overall performance. Dropping the
pressure of constant productivity in favor of biohacking your creative
process with food, exercise, and right-timing will allow you to do more
of the work that matters to you, and do it better. And when you wrap up a
job well done and take some time to reflect and learn from the
experience, it’s like hitting the reset button on your system. You end up
feeling like you’re doing less, and you come back reenergized and ready
to go for the next big idea so you can achieve more and feel great about
it. And this dynamic helps you build more energy for other areas of your
life.
Chapter 8
Get More of What You Want
in Sex and Relationships
If you want to be treasured, you have to treasure
yourself first and then show someone how to
treasure you.
—REGENA THOMASHAUER
L
et’s be real. If you’re like many women—whether you’re
straight, gay, bisexual, or anywhere else on the sexuality
spectrum—you probably aren’t getting enough of what you
want out of your sex life. Sure, you may tell your friends—and
yourself—that your sex life is fine, but if you’re being
completely honest, it could be better. You aren’t the only one.
In a 2015 survey by Healthy Women, 60 percent of women
admitted their sex life wasn’t as good as it could be. That’s
because we aren’t getting enough sex, and we aren’t enjoying
the sex we’re having to the fullest. A 2017 study in Archives of
Sexual Behavior found that Americans are having less sex than
we did ten years ago; when the researchers controlled for age
and time period, they discovered it’s millennials and the iGen
crowd who are having the least amount of sex compared with
other generations. Even those born in the 1930s—yes, your
great-grandparents—were having more sex than today’s
young adults. I hear about low libido and unfulfilling sex
every day from the women who come to me for hormonal
help.
Mariel is one of them. She had recently had a second child,
and between the lifestyle adjustment, which was causing
massive fatigue and some relationship tension, and her
unresolved postpartum hormonal imbalance, her sex drive had
flatlined. Remembering how things had been before the kids
were born, she wanted to get that spark back for herself and
her relationship. When she came to me in search of help for
her period problems, she didn’t fully appreciate how regaining
hormonal balance would massively impact her sex drive. In
addition, she gained the knowledge that her libido changes
throughout her cycle. Now, she’s confidently enjoying higher-
quality orgasms on a more regular basis and feeling organic
interest in sexual experiences with herself and her partner.
Like Mariel, when you approach your sex life and
relationships with your monthly cycle in mind, you can
biohack your way to a heightened sex drive, more pleasurable
sex, better orgasms, and a stronger relationship. Remember,
however, that there are two people in a partnership, and it’s
important to know not only where you are in your cycle but
also to know where your partner is with their circadian and
hormonal patterns. This chapter gives you the six-part plan to
get you to a more fulfilling sex life, with your hormones
leading the way!
CALL ME BY MY NAME
If you take your sex and relationship cues from our
general culture, you’re probably used to having your
sex organs discussed using euphemistic terms like
“down there,” “coochie,” or “vajayjay.” If we are
confused about how exactly to reference our
physiology, however, we won’t feel confident about
how to clearly communicate our desires to our
partners. It’s essential to talk about your body, and
that’s why I’m going to call your miraculous parts by
their names—vagina, labia, clitoris, and so on. Only
when we name and claim our bodies and hormonal
reality will we be able to use them to get the pleasure
we deserve.
Step 1: Engage the Four Stages of
Arousal
Whatever you learned about the birds and the bees, I can
guarantee it didn’t do justice to the awe-inspiring reality of
your biological and neurochemical sexual response. If most of
what you expect about your sexual response is set against the
standards of pornography or romantic movies, you probably
think you should be able to go from zero to climax in no time.
But that’s just not how the female body operates. Getting
turned on and reaching orgasm is a specific process that you
can engage with reliable success once you know about it. For
women, arousal involves four distinct stages: tumescence,
orgasmic plateau, climax, and the refractory period.
Understanding the mechanics of your sexual response is the
first step toward biohacking the arousal process to prime your
body for better orgasms and guaranteeing yourself consistent
pleasure.
Stage 1: Tumescence
It’s common knowledge that men get an erection as part of the
sexual process, but did you know that women’s sexual
anatomy undergoes a similar process of engorgement called
tumescence? This stage can begin the moment you feel the
desire to have sex or within seconds of erotic stimulation. In
some women, or during some phases of your cycle, it can take
longer to start feeling aroused (how each phase of your cycle
affects the arousal process is detailed later in the chapter).
When arousal does kick in, your heart starts pumping faster,
your breathing accelerates, and your blood pressure rises. Your
brain’s limbic system—the emotional center—sets off a chain
reaction that leads to the release of a flood of neurochemicals
that make you even more interested in sex than you already
were. The release of the chemical nitric oxide increases blood
flow to the genitals, causing the outer and inner labia to swell
and become more responsive to pleasurable stimulation. Your
clitoris—the seat of eight thousand nerve endings exclusively
designed to generate the most pleasure for you—engorges as
well, allowing maximum surface area for those nerve endings
to fulfill their destiny. Vaginal lubrication is triggered, and the
tissues of the vaginal canal engorge, making it expand and
lengthen. The increase in blood flow may also cause the
breasts to swell and the nipples to harden.
Stage 2: Orgasmic Plateau
As more stimulation takes place, your heart, breathing, and
blood pressure continue to rise. The increase in blood flow
may cause a flush that colors your face, chest, or abdomen. As
if by magic, the increase in blood flow also intensifies the
color of your labia, from its relaxed paler shade to a darker
version of itself. In preparation for increased stimulation, the
vaginal opening narrows while the part near the cervix
expands, intensifying sensations of pleasure. Activity
heightens in the brain’s pleasure centers while the regions
associated with anxiety take a break. The neurochemicals
dopamine and epinephrine rise. Your clitoris becomes
hypersensitive and retracts under the clitoral hood. As you
near climax, your cerebellum sends signals to your muscles,
causing them to tighten. You’re almost there . . . but wait! So
many of us are in such a rush to climax as quickly as possible
that we miss out on the massive hormonal and health benefits
of the orgasmic plateau phase. If you were to think of the
climactic experience on a scale of one to ten, with climax
being a ten, then your orgasmic plateau would be anywhere
from a four to an eight. Spending more time here will generate
more oxytocin and nitric oxide, which will flush cortisol,
improve your period, your fertility, the regularity of ovulation,
and your immune function. Oxytocin also makes you feel
more connected to your partner. Together they can even lead to
a bigger, more intense orgasm. So even though you may be
tempted to rush to climax, do yourself and your body a favor
by lingering in this phase by getting close to climax then
backing away, repeating this edging process while staying
between a four and an eight for as close to twenty minutes as
possible, or more. Do this twice a week to reap all the benefits.
Stage 3: Climax
Climax is the most fleeting of the four stages, lasting mere
seconds when the clitoris’s eight thousand nerve endings—
that’s twice as many nerve endings as the penis, FYI—have
had enough and need a break. Your brain’s production of
oxytocin, serotonin, and DHEA spikes, putting a hold on the
release of the stress hormone cortisol and causing waves of
pleasure to wash over you. Your muscles spasm, causing your
vaginal walls to contract rhythmically. Your back may arch,
and your hands and feet may clutch involuntarily. Some
women may experience female ejaculation, which involves the
secretion of vaginal fluid. (And contrary to a common myth,
no, this fluid isn’t urine.)
Stage 4: Refractory Period
As you bask in the glow of that oxytocin and nitric oxide rush
after climax, your body returns to normal. Your heartbeat,
blood flow, and breathing slow down; your sex organs return
to their normal size and color; and your muscles relax. Your
cervix, however, remains open for up to half an hour, a useful
fact for couples trying to conceive, so sperm has time to find
its way into the uterus. In men, the refractory period prevents
them from being able to experience climax again for a while.
But for women—lucky us!—we need only a brief resting
period for those clitoral nerve endings to calm down and get
set up for another ride through these four steps. In fact, many
woman can experience multiple clitoral orgasms (although
there are other types, the vast majority of women can achieve
clitoral orgasms most easily). All that’s needed for you to
discover what’s possible for your pleasure is to work these
four stages and enjoy what each has to offer.
Step 2: Sync Your Orgasm with Your
Cycle
The second part of biohacking your orgasms lies in syncing
with the four phases of your cycle. The same way your
monthly hormonal changes affect your energy levels, moods,
cognitive powers, creativity, immune system, and other
biological systems, they also impact how you experience the
four stages of arousal, your interest in sex, and even the
intensity of your orgasms. Your needs, emotions, energy, and
desires fluctuate from week to week with the rise and fall of
your hormones. If there are some days when you’re not in the
mood, you need more foreplay to feel hot and heavy, or it
takes longer to climax, it’s not because there’s something
wrong with you. No need to get in your head about it—it’s just
your biochemistry doing its normal thing. The more you know
how it works, the less you’ll be left unnecessarily wondering
whether something is wrong with your sex drive. When this
information finally sinks in, you’ll realize you can stop
blaming yourself, let go of the guilt, and get the love you
deserve when you want it the most. You’ll also gain a more
thorough understanding that your partner’s needs may
fluctuate on a daily or monthly basis, so you can become more
attuned to your partner’s desires too. Throughout this next
section, I’ll describe healthy sex drive patterns throughout the
cycle and give you pointers on how to support your body,
relationship, and sexual pleasure in each of the four phases.
Sex will never be the same again. If you read through this and
realize your libido may be suffering from hormonal
imbalances, then refer back to the Biohacking Tool Kit section
to learn what you can do to regain your drive.
PHASE 1: PREPARE
Follicular Phase: 7–10 Days
Cyclical Focus: Novelty
Body focus: As your follicular phase begins, your sex
hormones—estrogen, progesterone, and testosterone—are
all lying low. Estrogen helps keep the vagina lubricated,
and because it’s in scarce supply now, your vagina may not
be as wet as it is at other times of the month. This dryness
is completely natural and doesn’t mean there’s anything
wrong with you. In fact, the follicular phase is one of two
dry phases you’ll experience during your cycle. To
optimize your orgasms during the dry phase, you should
absolutely use a lubricant. Be sure to let your sexual
partner know you’re in a dry phase so they can reach for
the lube for you.
Relationship focus: As you saw in chapter 3 when you
learned about how your brain chemistry changes across the
menstrual cycle, you’re more receptive to novel
experiences and filled with energy during the follicular
phase, so get creative and try something new with your
partner. Novel experiences bring you together, create
lasting memories, and help you bond more closely. Take a
cooking class together, visit a museum, hike a new trail, or
take a weekend trip to a new city. In a long-term
relationship, it’s very important to keep things fresh and
exciting by breaking out of your routine. The follicular
phase provides an ideal opportunity—and reminder—to try
new things on a monthly basis. Another bonus is that doing
anything that amps up the brain’s production of oxytocin
and nitric oxide—like getting outside for a run together or
trying something new—makes you feel closer to each
other. It’s a bonding mechanism that reminds you why you
love this person and primes you for intimacy and sex.
Sex focus: This is the perfect time to keep it fresh by
exploring innovative ways of pleasuring each other—
experiment with new positions, give tantric massage
techniques a try, or get into some role-playing. Linger in
the orgasmic plateau phase so you can build up to a
satisfying climax. The nitric oxide and oxytocin released
during the orgasmic plateau and climax will strengthen
your emotional bond.
PHASE 2: OPEN UP
Ovulatory Phase: 3–4 Days
Cyclical Focus: Receiving
Body focus: With estrogen and testosterone surging, your sex
drive will be in overdrive. Because of these hormonal
changes, your body produces up to twenty times more
cervical fluid, making your vagina wetter than usual. This
is one of the wet phases of your cycle and the time when
your body is primed for receiving—receiving sperm for
conception purposes, receiving attention from possible
mates, and, most important, receiving maximal pleasure.
Remember the concept of taking the egg approach from
chapter 6? Think of yourself like the egg, waiting in the
uterus. The egg does not chase the sperm; it sends out a
signal to drive them into a frenzy, then waits to receive
them. You should take a cue from the egg, and get what
you want, just the way you want it.
Relationship focus: This is a great time for bonding and
socializing with your significant other. When you hang out
only with each other, it can lead to feelings of isolation and
boredom, so use this time for dining out with other
couples, hosting a dinner party at home, or going to other
social gatherings. You’ll feel more talkative and engaged,
making this the ideal time to talk to your mate about your
personal and couple goals, dreams, and fantasies. With my
husband, I like to take this time to touch base on what we
want from our future together and look ahead to see where
we want to be in five, ten, or twenty years. This
communication makes us feel closer to each other and
strengthens our bond. If you’re single, this is also an ideal
time to go on first dates. Your increased communication
skills make you more magnetic, and your soaring estrogen
levels make you naturally more alluring during your fertile
phase. In fact, a 2013 study in Hormones and Behavior
found that both men and women find women’s facial
features and voices most attractive during the ovulatory
phase.
Sex focus: One of the best things about the ovulatory phase is
that you’re naturally more orgasmic at this time of the
month. And since your body is geared to draw more
attention during this phase, the best practice is for you to
focus on receiving. Take advantage of your super orgasmic
powers, and encourage your partner to take the time to
pleasure you just the way you like it. And don’t feel guilty
about it! We’ve been so conditioned to take care of
everybody else and put our needs last that it may be hard
for you to wrap your head around the concept of letting a
sexual encounter be focused on your pleasure. Of course,
you can reciprocate; but make sure your needs are met
first, then give. And since you’re more verbally oriented
during the ovulatory phase, don’t hesitate to ask for what
you want—“More to the left, slow down, faster, don’t
stop,” and so on. If you have a hard time being on the
receiving end of all that attention, use this as a way to
become more self-aware about why it’s difficult for you,
and work through this difficulty in your sexual encounters.
This process can help you become more comfortable
receiving in other areas of your life, too.
PHASE 3: WORK
Luteal Phase: 10–14 Days
Cyclical Focus: Clarity
Body focus: The luteal phase is made up of two parts. During
the first half of the luteal phase, you have robust levels of
estrogen, progesterone, and testosterone, so you’re well-
lubricated—making this half a wet phase—and more
readily in the mood for sexual activity. During the second
half of the luteal phase, these hormones begin to decrease
in concentration, and so does your lubrication—making
this half a dry phase—and your interest in sex may be
lessened.
Relationship focus: The first half of the luteal phase can feel
like an extended ovulatory phase, so enjoy. As soon as
estrogen recedes from your brain chemistry during the
second half of the luteal phase, however, you’ll be able to
be more honest with yourself about anything that needs to
be addressed in your relationship. Estrogen acts as a social
lubricant and makes you more willing to overlook
problems. If there’s something that isn’t working, you can
bet it will bubble up to the surface during this phase. You
simply won’t be able to ignore the truth the way you can in
the first half of your cycle, when you’re bathed in high
levels of estrogen and can let things slide. Our cultural
conditioning dictates, however, that you shouldn’t believe
yourself in this phase, that you’re just being “hormonal.”
In reality, your cycle has baked in the ideal time for you to
prioritize your needs and address any issues that are
bothering you. This phase is like a monthly checkup for
the emotional health of your partnership and a major
opportunity to move in the right direction and deepen your
relationship. This isn’t something that should be avoided
or feared. If you’re hormonally balanced, you’ll be able to
express your insights in a loving, constructive way. When
hormones are imbalanced, however, you might find it
harder to distinguish between PMS-related irritability and
discontent with your partner or your relationship. Keep
observing these feelings for a few cycles while you work
on balancing your hormones. Either way, the truth of your
feelings is your body’s way of helping you have the
relationship you deserve. If these feelings don’t change
after you balance your hormones, you might want to
rethink your commitment to your mate. In fact, the easiest
time for you to break up with someone would be during
the second half of the luteal phase or during the menstrual
phase. The luteal phase is also an ideal time to focus on
domestic duties. It might not sound sexy, but to get the
most pleasure out of your relationship all month long you
do have to attend to the day-to-day stuff of life—
budgeting, cleaning, and organizing. Doing it together
gives you another chance to bond.
Sex focus: During the first half of the luteal phase, you may
still be enjoying a strong sex drive. However, your sex
drive is likely to start to wane during the second half of the
luteal phase. This part of the phase is best suited to slower
sex. See whether you respond better with lots of foreplay
and lubricant.
USING YOUR CYCLE TO HELP WITH
BREAKING UP
You can use your cycle to help you make decisions and
take actions about relationships and commitments. I
recommend going through many, many hormonal
cycles with your life partner before you fully commit.
Feeling yourself in relation to their energy as you shift
through every phase is an excellent way to deepen your
emotional intimacy with your partner and ensures you
can live with them in every phase.
I remember noticing the value of cyclical
awareness as it applied to relationships for the first
time in one of my relationships. With every month, I
was only at ease in the first half of my cycle—the
follicular and ovulatory phases. Like clockwork, come
the luteal and menstrual phases, I felt unsatisfied in my
relationship. It was clear to me in the second half of the
cycle what the issues were and why I wanted to end the
relationship. But once ovulation started, I was more
willing to overlook these issues. I had to go through a
couple of cycles where I understood that the truth—
with a capital T—of the situation was coming forward
in my luteal and menstrual phases, and I needed to act
on this precious information. So I timed the breakup
during my luteal phase when I was strongest in my
conviction—in my truth—and that made it so much
easier.
Trust that as you live through many cycles with
your partner, your body will offer you her feedback
about a relationship. And if you do need to end it, use
your hormonal advantage to do so.
PHASE 4: REST
Menstrual Phase: 3–7 Days
Cyclical Focus: Recharge
Body focus: As your hormone levels fall, your interest in
lovemaking may dwindle, and you might even want
physical distance from your mate. However, something
else is at play here. Right before your bleed, your uterus
increases slightly in volume. As a result, it’s heavier on the
pelvic floor, which can create pleasurable pressure on your
whole genital structure. Even though your hormones aren’t
driving your desire for sex, the pressure of your uterus may
stimulate the nerve endings in your G-spot, inner labia, and
the clitoral legs (the paired “cura” that descend from the
sides of the clitoris) and put you in the mood for sex. Many
people assume that menstrual blood would act as a
lubricant, but in fact it does not. The more friction you
apply to it and the more air gets on it, the drier it becomes.
It’s similar to having blood on your skin; it dries out
quickly. So contrary to popular belief, this is not a wet
phase; it’s a dry phase, and you’ll need lube for maximal
pleasure.
Relationship focus: You may want some alone time during
the menstrual phase, and it can be very beneficial in
helping you recharge and connect to yourself. Indulge in
self-care practices that make you feel good, and enjoy
some “me time”—read a good novel, watch a movie,
journal, or have a phone chat with a friend. Spending
quality time with yourself is always healthy and can boost
your appreciation for your partner, whether you engage in
sex during this phase or not.
Sex focus: In our culture, there’s a stigma that says period sex
is taboo. Many women think they should avoid sex and
avert their partners from engaging during this time,
because of the negative way we’ve been conditioned to
perceive our menstrual blood. You may even have a
history of dating people who are turned off by your bleed,
typically because of a lack of correct information. Nature
intends for you to be pleasured all month long. When your
hormones are low, your uterus picks up the slack to
stimulate you from within and build your interest in sex.
It’s up to you to explore and experiment with sex during
your period. Some women find it hugely beneficial to relax
the fascia that holds the uterus. Think of this as a sort of
internal massage that can relax the action of the uterus and
diminish cramps. Clitoral stimulation will release a flood
of nitric oxide and oxytocin while flushing cortisol to help
resolve any sort of menstrual discomfort. On both a
physical and hormonal level, sex during your bleed
definitely can be beneficial if you want it. Some women do
prefer taking a break from sex during menstruation
because of the natural dip in their sex drive. If you’re
concerned about your sheets, there are period sex blankets
and other great products to get around that situation.
Whichever way you feel—go-time or no-go—it’s all good
as long as you follow what your body and hormones are
telling you to do, not cultural taboos.
The Cycle Syncing Method™: Love FLO
FOLLICULAR OVULATORY LUTEAL MENSTRUAL
Novelty Receiving Clarity Recharge
Duration: 7–10 Duration: 3–4 Duration: Duration: 3–7
Days Days 10–14 Days Days
Do
Take a trip Enjoy dinner domestic Indulge in self-
somewhere new. with friends. projects care.
together.
Evaluate
Go to a show or Read a good
Go to a party. your
museum. book.
relationship.
Cook
Talk with your
Try new sexual together and Watch your
mate about sex
positions. stay in for favorite movie.
fantasies.
date night.
Ask what
Get outside and
Discuss your you can do Ask for a foot
do something
relationship to make the massage from
physical
goals. relationship your partner.
together.
better.
Enjoy
Focus on quickies in Spend quality
Go on first
foreplay and use the first half time with
dates.
lubricant. of this yourself.
phase.
Enjoy more
Pay attention to foreplay in Always use
Have multiple
the orgasmic the second lubricant in this
orgasms.
plateau phase. half of this phase.
phase.
SOLO PLAY IS ESSENTIAL
No partner? No problem! And even if you do have a
partner, it’s essential for you to cultivate a self-
pleasuring practice for two reasons: (1) it helps keep
your hormones balanced, and (2) it increases your self-
awareness of your sexual response, so that when you
do engage in partnered sexual activity you’re able to
share your road map to pleasure with your partner so
your needs will be met more consistently. Self-pleasure
feels great, can alleviate PMS symptoms like cramps
and moodiness, and is connected with improved body
image and sexual functioning. Just keep your body’s
cyclical pattern in mind. Your needs and desires
depend entirely on what’s happening with your
hormones, and knowing this information will empower
you to access the right tools in your arsenal at the right
time. Speaking of tools, if you want to maximize the
benefits of alone time, skip the vibrator during wet
phases. These sex toys are like taking an expressway to
climax, and you miss out on many of the benefits of
the orgasmic plateau phase.
Follicular phase: Use lube, try something new, and, if
you want, experiment with toys to see what new
stimulation you can create.
Ovulatory phase: Skip the vibrator and opt for your
hand instead; linger in the orgasmic plateau phase.
Luteal phase: During the first half of this phase, ditch
the vibrator and use your hand instead. Lube, and,
if you like, the vibrator, are good for the second
half of this phase. In both halves of this phase, set
the mood for yourself—put on something that
makes you feel good, take a bath, light a candle,
and indulge all your senses.
Menstrual phase: If interested, use lube and turn on
the vibrator. This can be a great cramp reliever.
Step 3: Nourish Your Libido and Orgasm
Did you know that certain foods and supplements can boost
your sex life? Here are some of the best sex enhancers. Many
of these are found in the FLO Balance Supplements
(www.FLOliving.com/supplements).
B vitamins (found in foods like nuts, seeds, meat, poultry,
fish, eggs, and dark leafy vegetables) help calm stress, which
is one of the most common sex-drive killers. Specifically,
during stressful times, B vitamins prevent dopamine and
serotonin from breaking down, leaving adequate amounts of
these feel-good neurochemicals so you feel energized instead
of drained. When you aren’t overwhelmed by stress, you’re
much more likely to be ready for sex.
Zinc (found in foods like meat, shellfish, legumes, and
seeds) promotes healthy testosterone levels by blocking an
enzyme called aromatase that converts this important hormone
into estrogen. Unless your body has enough zinc, aromatase
can transform too much testosterone into estrogen, lowering
testosterone levels. And you know what happens then—your
sex drive takes a nosedive. Decades of studies have found that
zinc supplementation leads to an increase in testosterone levels
in men. For example, a 2000 study in the Journal of Exercise
Physiology Online found that men who took 30 milligrams of
zinc on a daily basis experienced an uptick in their
testosterone levels. Unfortunately, the researchers didn’t
include women in this study.
Magnesium (found in foods like almonds, avocados, dark
leafy greens, and watermelon) reduces the amount of
testosterone that binds to SHBG, allowing more of the
hormone to remain in the bloodstream. Higher levels of the
bioactive-free testosterone leads to more sexual desire.
Magnesium also reduces symptoms of anxiety and depression,
according to a 2017 study in PLOS ONE, which sets you up
for enhanced enjoyment.
Omega-3 fatty acids (found in foods like salmon, walnuts,
sardines, and flaxseeds) play a role in preventing hormonal
imbalance and contribute to the release of the
neurotransmitters dopamine, serotonin, GABA, and glutamate.
Balanced hormones and healthy neurotransmitter function
improve your health and mood in so many ways, they also
make you more likely to give bedroom action the green light.
A 2014 study also points to a link between omega-3 fatty acid
consumption and nitric oxide, a gas produced naturally by the
body that promotes better blood flow. More blood circulating
to your lady parts causes them to swell during the sexual
arousal stage, leading to bigger and better orgasms.
Probiotics (found in foods like sauerkraut, tempeh, and
kombucha) may not have a direct effect on your sex hormones
or reproductive organs, but probiotics do impact your overall
gut health, which is linked to moods and mental health. You’re
already well aware of how much your moods impact your sex
drive. A 2017 study in the Annals of General Psychiatry
linked psychiatric disorders like depression to imbalanced gut
bacteria. Other research, including a 2005 study in Medical
Hypotheses, suggests probiotics have the potential to restore
microbiome balance.
PHEROMONES
Pheromones are scented airborne molecules humans
secrete that can be powerful aphrodisiacs or strong
repellents. You may not be consciously aware that a
person’s scent is turning you on or off; you just know
intuitively that you’re wildly attracted to, or totally not
into, that person who’s chatting you up at the bar. A
2013 look at pheromones and their effects on women’s
sexuality in Facts, Views & Vision in ObGyn suggests
the molecules play a positive role in our moods and
sexual response as well as in mate selection, proving
even further that our biology often drives our behavior.
You can even biohack your male partner’s pheromones
to boost your sex drive during the luteal phase of your
cycle, when your interest in lovemaking fades. Here’s
how I do it. During the luteal phase I prepare dishes for
my husband with celery because it’s packed with male
steroids called androstenene and androstenol that cause
him to pump out more of his intoxicating pheromones.
The more of these sexy scented molecules he secretes,
the more attractive he becomes. And the more likely I
am to get in the mood. It’s a win-win.
Adaptogens—including maca powder, ashwagandha,
reishi mushroom, and holy basil—are natural substances that
can support your sex drive when you are under stress or when
you are perimenopausal or postpartum. Check the resources
section for more on adaptogens.
MAKE A SUPER SEX-DRIVE SALAD
Here’s a recipe that’s chock-full of the micronutrients
just listed that are libido enhancers for both sexes.
Enjoy!
Super Sex-Drive Salad
6 slices watermelon
1 bunch asparagus
¼ cup raw pumpkin seeds
¼ cup raw walnuts
2 stalks celery
2 tablespoons olive oil
2 tablespoons lemon juice
Sea salt or pink salt to taste
Cut asparagus into two-inch pieces and steam lightly,
so they are still crunchy. Cut watermelon into
matchsticks the size of the asparagus pieces. Use a
spice grinder to grind the pumpkin seeds and walnuts.
Toss into the salad. Break out your mandolin, shred
some celery paper-thin, and sprinkle it on top of the
salad. Drizzle with a little extra virgin olive oil and a
pinch of sea salt and lemon juice.
Step 4: Loop Your Partner into Your
Cycle
Wouldn’t it be great if your partner were inherently tapped into
your secret desires and needs and could give you what you
needed sexually? It is great not to have to settle for less, and
it’s possible when you’re tuned in to your cyclical needs.
When you’re able to educate your partner about not only
where you are in your monthly cycle but also what that means
for your physical, sexual, and relationship needs, your partner
will find it so much easier to deliver what you want when you
want it.
No matter how many years you’ve been together, you
should never assume that your partner knows where you are in
your cycle. It’s up to you to let your partner know you’re in a
dry phase, for example. Whether you’re in a female-male or
same-sex relationship, you might say, “Let’s keep the lube
right next to the bed for easy access this week.” And when
your partner goes to get the lube, smile and give them some
positive reinforcement. It helps to explain and give directions
and clue your partner in to where you are in your cycle and
what you’d like to make everything flow more smoothly.
When your partner knows they’re more likely to be able to
give you what you need and create massive pleasure for you, it
makes your partner feel empowered and creates a beautiful
dynamic that increases emotional intimacy in addition to more
satisfying sex.
I meet with many women who feel sexually shut down or
emotionally disconnected from their partners because these
women let too much go unsaid about what they need on a
physical level. “Sometimes I want my partner to go slower
when they go down on me.” “Sometimes I need more
foreplay.” “I’d like to try some new positions that might
stimulate my clitoris more during intercourse.” These are just
some of the things I hear from women. These women are left
feeling unfulfilled, and I would bet their partners feel
frustrated, too. Your partner can’t guess what’s going to turn
you on each time. They might think that because you went
wild over something they did last week you’ll want that same
thing again this week. And they don’t understand why it
doesn’t have the same orgasm-producing effect week after
week.
I’ve been with my husband for many years, and I still
make sure he knows what phase I’m in and what kind of
foreplay I need. He appreciates the information because it sets
him up for success with me. When he makes me feel good, it
makes him feel good, too. This practice of informing him of
my hormonal and physiological reality has also gone beyond
our sex lives. When I was pregnant and getting close to my
delivery date, I prepared a four-page document for him about
the four stages of labor, what he needed to know about them,
and what he could do to maximize my comfort in each of
them. Yes, I biohacked my labor and my husband was fully
aware of what he was getting into when he married the woman
who started the Period Club. And when the time came and I
was dealing with my experience of labor, I didn’t have to try to
explain to him what was happening, nor did he feel clueless or
helpless. I didn’t have to say a word—and at the time I could
not have articulated, for example, “Okay, honey, now I need
you to apply counterpressure right above my hips to minimize
pain.” While your everyday sex life might not require a four-
page document, when you understand your process and
advocate for your needs, things can flow more naturally,
especially in the bedroom.
If it feels overwhelming to keep track of your hormonal
phase and notify your partner, you can simplify the process
with one of the features in the MyFLO app, which alerts your
partner when you enter a new phase of your menstrual cycle
and gives them a heads-up about what’s going on hormonally
and physically. The app is just an additional way you can keep
your partner in the loop for a smoother relationship. This can
be a big benefit if you’re one of the many women who
struggle to tell your partner what you want and need sexually,
or if you don’t want to have to verbalize what you need during
sex. Sometimes you just want to have one of those hot-and-
heavy sessions where you and your partner are perfectly in
sync and hitting all the right spots. The gift of looping your
partner into your cyclical awareness beforehand is that you
don’t have to talk about it while you’re in the middle of things.
Your partner will already know what you need, so you can just
get in the flow and enjoy the ride. You really can biohack your
way to a better relationship!
It Takes Two
So much of what I’m sharing with you in this chapter focuses
on what you can do to enhance your sex life and relationship.
But achieving this kind of open, communicative, satisfying sex
life and relationship isn’t all on your shoulders. Just as you
need to take responsibility to keep your hormones optimized
and learn about your orgasmic process so you can enjoy all
these benefits with your partner, you need to find a significant
other who is invested in optimizing their own well-being and
education, because the quality of their health and awareness
will impact the quality of your relationship. You need a partner
who will embrace this knowledge and actively participate in
this new paradigm—someone who’s willing to encourage you
to live in sync with your cycle. Luckily, with wellness
becoming more mainstream, it can be easier to find someone
who is up for exploring and adopting a new relationship
paradigm. If you haven’t met your life partner yet, choose
wisely! Imagine dating someone with cyclical awareness as
the foundation of your relationship from the get-go. That
awareness will make those important conversations and
transitions down the road much smoother. When you’re both
healthy and hormonally balanced, it makes it so much easier to
optimize your emotional and sexual life.
Step 5: Tune In to the Cycles of Long-
Term Relationships
Okay, it’s not all about sex: falling in love is one of the most
blissful human experiences in the universe. When you meet
your soulmate, you think the rush of attraction and lust will
last forever. But true love goes through changes similar to all
living things in nature. C. G. Jung, the influential twentieth-
century Swiss psychiatrist and psychoanalyst, wrote
extensively on something he called the inner marriage, an
attempt to balance the feminine and masculine within
ourselves. In his view, the drive to marry is merely an external
manifestation of our desire for inner wholeness. Psychoanalyst
Marion Woodman, who has authored numerous popular books
exploring feminine consciousness, wrote in The Maiden King
that both genders needed to incorporate elements of the other
to be whole. This primal urge for oneness drives us to seek a
partner in life for a long-term relationship. But making a
relationship last can be hard work. The relationship must be
reinvented at four critical inflection points during the life cycle
as a whole. Just as knowing how to work with each of the four
phases of your menstrual cycle is a huge advantage, so too is
knowing that these four stages of a relationship are a normal
and expected part of the journey. Having this knowledge in
advance can help you navigate the process with increased
awareness, compassion, and grace. By recognizing the
interplay of your biochemistry and identity throughout them
all, you can have a wonderful long-lasting relationship. You
could even be one of those lucky, loving couples celebrating
fifty years of togetherness. But if you fall headlong into these
transitions without understanding the biological and
neurochemical underpinnings that drive them, your
relationship could be vulnerable at any one of the inflection
points.
Stage 1: Romantic Courtship
The courtship stage is all about novelty and passion—which in
a way makes it similar to the follicular and ovulatory phase of
your cycle. In the early, blissful days of a relationship, you
can’t stop thinking about that special someone and can’t keep
your hands off each other. The infatuation is so strong, you
think about each other constantly and want to spend every
minute of every day with that special someone. You may feel
intoxicated or completely out of control. And in a way, you
are. When you’re in the throes of romantic love, your biology
works overtime to push you to mate. Helen Fisher, a scientist
and the author of Why We Love: The Nature and Chemistry of
Romantic Love, performed a study of college students who
were madly in love. Fisher scanned the brains of the young
lovers and discovered that showing them images of their
sweetheart fired up certain brain regions and neurochemical
circuits. Specifically, she found that the brain’s reward system
—involved in drive and motivation to seek out pleasurable
things—lights up as well as areas that spew out dopamine.
Dopamine increases the production of a host of other
hormones and chemicals, including testosterone and
norepinephrine. As you recall, your testosterone levels
naturally rise during your ovulatory phase, which intensifies
your sex drive and pushes you to seek out a mate.
Norepinephrine acts as a stimulant that revs up your energy
and heightens focused attention. The result? You feel more
alive, think obsessively about your new love, and experience
feelings of euphoria. These hormones communicate with your
body, including your genitals and skin, so a simple touch from
your lover can fire up the reward system and dopamine
release, creating a powerful loop that drives you to fall more
deeply in love. Be aware that some people can become overly
infatuated with the rush of falling in love, so they have trouble
getting beyond this stage of a relationship. This inherent
vulnerability arises when the intense feelings subside, and
such people then seek out a new partner so they can
experience the love high again.
Stage 2: Domestic Bliss
The domestic bliss stage resembles the first half of the luteal
phase of your cycle. As your relationship progresses, the
adrenaline rush of new love wears off and transitions into a
more comfortable commitment phase. The reward system and
chemical cocktail that drove you to fall in love shift out of
high gear and back to more sustainable levels. This can be a
make-or-break moment for a relationship, because some
people experience a sort of withdrawal from those heady
chemicals or think it means they’ve fallen out of love. If you
can make it through this period, the biological bonding
chemicals oxytocin and vasopressin take over now.
Researchers suggest oxytocin is such a powerful bonding
mechanism it may promote fidelity. In a 2012 German study in
the Journal of Neuroscience, researchers wanted to test
whether giving men a dose of the “love hormone” oxytocin by
nasal spray could entice them to go too far in a flirtatious
encounter with an attractive woman. What they found was
men who were in a committed monogamous relationship were
more likely to keep their distance from the woman compared
with single men or those who had received a placebo. In this
phase of a relationship or marriage, you’re washing dishes,
changing diapers, and remodeling the bathroom, and those are
just a few things on your seemingly endless to-do list. It’s not
sexy stuff. A key vulnerability of this phase emerges when
couples let the stresses of child-rearing and work pull their
focus from each other and stop putting in the effort to make
each partner feel special. So how do you keep things fresh?
Syncing with your infradian clock is the answer. This can
be a magical time when you’re making the best of every phase
of your cycle to keep things exciting for more fulfilling sex
and a stronger relationship. You won’t be feeling the
stimulation of new love with a new person, but you can be
continually learning something new about how your body
functions and how your partner’s body operates. I remember
after I had our daughter, when my husband and I were just
beginning to engage physically again. When I was in my luteal
phase, I had to remind him that I needed more foreplay,
because my biology wouldn’t let me go from zero to sexy in
sixty seconds flat the way he could. I had to let him know that
we had to take it slow. I had him rub my shoulders for ten
minutes, which helped me relax and primed my body for
intimacy. And he realized that spending a little extra time on
foreplay helped me switch out of mom-mode.
Keeping your sex life alive during this phase is critical to
the success of your relationship. Sexual activity and orgasm
cause the release of the “cuddle hormone” oxytocin, which
strengthens feelings of intimacy, bonding, trust, and affection.
Sex can also give you and your mate a happiness jolt thanks to
the afterglow from a good romp. In 2017, the journal
Psychological Science reported that newlywed couples
experienced feelings of satisfaction up to forty-eight hours
after sexual activity. The spouses who experienced the
strongest sense of afterglow also reported the greatest
happiness four to six months later.
Stage 3: Midlife Transition
The midlife transition is similar to the second half of the luteal
phase, and provides a lot of clarity in a relationship. When
you’re in perimenopause, your values and interests shift. Jung
calls this transition, from about forty on, the period when
people become more interested in their relationship with their
own soul. The potential is that you and your partner can wake
up one day wanting very different things out of life. Several
things are happening on a biological level that can make you
question whether you’re feeling fulfilled, or heading for
Splitsville. If you’re in a female-male relationship, understand
that your partner may be experiencing his own version of
“manopause,” or may have erectile issues. As testosterone
levels drop, men’s sex drive can flounder. The result may be
friction and a sexual disconnect. If you’re in a same-sex
relationship, your partner may be going through her own
hormonal issues. If you haven’t been nourishing your
hormones throughout your reproductive years, you may have
hormonal challenges now that are having negative effects on
both vaginal lubrication and physical desire, making it harder
for you to achieve orgasm.
You don’t have to be blindsided by this situation. When
you understand your biology and anticipate these changes, you
and your other half can prepare for this new phase in your
relationship. Your cycle actually provides you with the perfect
practice model—the luteal phase. The hormonal levels during
this time are similar to what you’ll be experiencing in the
second half of perimenopause. I make sure to let my husband
know when I’m in my luteal phase as it’s like a ten-day
practice run for what’s to come. It’s a way for us to deepen our
understanding of each other. During this transition, you’re
going to need a lot of patience and compassion for each other,
and you’ll have to be proactive to make sex more pleasurable.
For example, use lube, increase foreplay, explore tantric
practices, and focus more on the emotional connection and
enjoyable physical sensations. You can also try biohacking to
maintain a strong libido in midlife, such as doubling down on
those B vitamins, omega-3s, magnesium, and zinc, or
exploring safe and natural testosterone boosters or CBD oil.
Knowledge is key to sailing through this transition.
Stage 4: Golden Years
The active work of career and child-rearing is done. Your time
is your own. You may be pursuing travel, enjoying
grandchildren, and exploring new hobbies. It can be a
wonderful time. This is the stage when health issues could
become more common, and you will need emotional resilience
to navigate the changes aging can bring. However, since
you’re back to operating on a single clock, it’s a chance for
you to use the gifts of all the phases of your cyclical life to
support your relationship. You can use all the lessons you’ve
learned from your cyclical awareness and put them into action
now. In essence, you’ll be bringing all this wisdom with you
into your golden years. Hormonal shifts in this stage lower
your drive to take care of others and gives you the space to
prioritize your own needs and interests. As you go through this
transition, you’ll have the opportunity to find new things that
fill you with pleasure day to day so you will feel that you have
some extra to give. Focusing on physical activities you can do
together—as in the follicular phase of your cyclical years—is
an excellent way to build oxytocin, strengthen your emotional
connection, and maintain physical health. All of these are
necessary to help you enjoy this time of your life together.
By preparing for this stage, you can shift more smoothly
from your cyclical infradian clock back to a daily circadian
rhythm. And when your partner is on board and aware of these
hormonal changes, you can manage them hand in hand and
enjoy your love throughout your golden years.
KEEP SEX SATISFYING THROUGHOUT
YOUR LIFE STAGES
Your sexual needs and desires will fluctuate throughout
your life cycle. Things that can negatively impact your
sexual response include these:
Hormonal birth control
Pregnancy
Postpartum
Perimenopause transition
Menopause
By syncing with your cycle, you can ease into these
transitions with much more sensitivity to what is
happening hormonally and physically, so you
understand your needs. With more patience,
compassion, and awareness of your biology and
neurochemistry, you’ll be able to continue getting
maximal pleasure from your sex life throughout these
life stages. You’ll already be comfortable using lube
when you need it, asking for what you want, and
letting your partner know when your body needs more
foreplay. Without this awareness, you can think you’re
experiencing some sexual dysfunction, or feel that
something is wrong with your relationship. With a
cyclical practice, you can avoid this confusion, feel
great about yourself and your partner, and have a more
satisfying sex life.
Step 6: Understand How Synthetic Birth
Control Dampens Your Sex Drive
As I explained in the Biohacking Tool Kit section, the pill can
cause you to fall for the wrong partner. It can also diminish
your sex drive, shrink your clitoris, and make it harder to
achieve orgasm. A 2010 German study in the Journal of
Sexual Medicine found that in some women, the birth control
pill stunts sex drive because of changes in a molecule called
sex hormone-binding globulin (more on this below). When
you’re on the pill, you’re basically in a no-phase zone. You
have a low-dose combo of estrogen and progesterone that
tricks your body into thinking implantation has occurred so
you stop ovulating, and that means you miss out on the
midcycle surge of testosterone. Higher levels of testosterone
during your ovulatory phase make you interested in sex.
Skipping that process in your cycle effectively suppresses your
sex drive. Even worse, you may find that you’re always dry
vaginally and struggling to reach orgasm. You aren’t
imagining this. You’re taking a medication that’s hijacking
your hormones and negatively impacting your sex life. Over
the years in my practice, many women have sought out my
help for their sex drive issues. Typically, these women have a
history of using synthetic birth control. Here’s how this
medication interferes with your sexual function.
Your liver produces a molecule called sex hormone-
binding globulin (SHBG) that’s involved in transporting
estrogen, testosterone, and dihydrotestosterone throughout
your body. High levels of SHBG are associated with lower
levels of testosterone. In a 2006 Journal of Sexual Medicine
study involving 124 premenopausal women with sexual health
complaints, researchers found that those taking synthetic birth
control pills had SHBG levels four times higher than women
who had never used hormonal contraceptives. Even after
ditching hormonal oral contraceptives, SHBG levels remained
elevated. The research suggests that long-term sexual,
metabolic, and mental health consequences could result from
continually elevated SHBG levels. In another study in a 2010
issue of the same journal, women taking hormonal
contraception reported lower sex drive and arousal compared
with women using nonhormonal birth control or no form of
birth control at all.
What they feel is real. Birth control pills lower testosterone
levels, dampening sexual desire. For some women who take
synthetic birth control, their testosterone production and libido
may never return to previous levels, even after discontinuing
the pill, according to a 2006 study in The Journal of Sexual
Medicine. If you’re taking the pill, you may be experiencing a
less-than-satisfying sex life due to the pill’s effects on moods,
testosterone production, estrogen levels, and SHBG. All of
these effects can create a loss of interest, vaginal dryness, and
difficulty achieving orgasm—a perfect recipe to sabotage your
sex life.
Good Sex, Great Health
Why should you care about boosting your sex drive and
having more fulfilling encounters? Aside from feeling
amazing, a satisfying sex life has hormone-balancing
superpowers and a host of other biological bonuses. A seminal
2007 report written by sex researchers and published by
Planned Parenthood was one of the first to highlight the many
health benefits of a happy sex life. Since then, researchers
have continued to find that having regular orgasmic sex—
whether it’s with a partner or solo—supports your
reproductive health, biological systems, and overall well-being
in a myriad of ways.
Orgasm Can Balance Your Hormones
Sex is good for your reproductive health. Decades of science
prove it. A series of studies has found that women who engage
in sexual activity with a partner at least once a week have
more regular cycles than those who are abstinent. In these
studies, the first of which appeared in the journal
Psychoneuroendocrinology in 1979, women who had sex at
least once a week had cycles that averaged twenty-nine days
with three days of bleeding. Women who had less frequent
sexual encounters tended to have more extreme cycle lengths
—either shorter than twenty-six days or longer than thirty-
three days.
Having more orgasmic sexual encounters also improves
your fertility. It isn’t simply because there are more
opportunities for sperm to fertilize an egg. Regular weekly
orgasmic sexual encounters have a positive impact on basal
body temperature (BBT), which promotes fertility. Your BBT
is the temperature you have when you wake up first thing in
the morning. Your BBT rises slightly during your most fertile
days, giving you a sign that you’re ovulating. Tracking BBT is
a method I recommend for women who want help determining
their fertile window. You simply take your temperature each
morning before getting out of bed, and track when your
temperature spikes. You can use a regular thermometer and
paper charts or an app. In a 1985 study in Physiology &
Behavior, women who were having weekly sex had the
highest incidence of fertile-type BBT levels, getting into the
baby-making range 90 percent of the time. Women who had
sex sporadically achieved this level 55 percent of the time,
while celibate women trailed, achieving this level only 44
percent of the time.
Having satisfying sex may also help alleviate two of the
most common PMS problems—headaches and cramps. The
next time you have either, you may want to skip the ibuprofen
and just get some action. Many studies have found that sexual
arousal, genital stimulation, and orgasm boost levels of
endorphin and corticosteroids that have an analgesic effect. A
2013 study in Cephalalgia surveyed eight hundred migraine
sufferers and two hundred cluster headache sufferers. Of those
who engaged in sexual activity while having a headache, 60
percent reported improvement in migraine pain, and 37
percent said pain diminished from a cluster headache. And
don’t think you’re the only one who is having sex or self-
stimulating to curb cramps. In psychologist Carol Rinkleib
Ellison’s book Women’s Sexualities, she reported that 9 percent
of about 1,900 US women said they masturbated in the
previous three months to relieve menstrual cramps.
There’s also some evidence that the healing power of sex
could go beyond everyday cramps. A 2002 study published in
the journal Gynecologic and Obstetric Investigation suggested
sexual activity could reduce the risk for endometriosis. Led by
a researcher from Southern Connecticut State University, the
study found that women who engaged in sexual activity and
experienced orgasm during menstruation had a lower
incidence of endometriosis. Considering I meet with so many
women who are suffering from this painful condition, I would
love to see additional research on this.
Sexual activity also promotes healthy estrogen levels to
keep vaginal tissues supple and protect against heart disease
and osteoporosis. And last but definitely not least, when you
have healthy hormones, the radiance on the inside is reflected
on the outside. Women having sex three times per week look
ten years younger compared with those engaging in sexual
activity only twice a week, according to psychologist David
Weeks in his book, Secrets of the Superyoung.
Big Health Benefits of Orgasm on Your Five
Biological Systems
Could the big O lower your risk for the big C and other major
diseases? Some studies suggest sexual activity could lower a
woman’s risk for breast cancer. Research from a 1989 issue of
the Journal of Clinical Epidemiology compared sexual activity
among fifty-one childless French women who had been
diagnosed with breast cancer within the three previous months
and ninety-five healthy women. The researchers found a
higher risk for breast cancer among women who had sex less
than once a month.
Having sex gets your blood pumping and your heart
beating faster, which could be good news for your ticker. A
2010 study found that men who had sex at least twice a week
were at a 50 percent reduced risk for cardiovascular disease.
Sadly, there is no comparable study looking at women’s sexual
behavior and risk for heart disease. However, in a 2016 study
in the journal Heart, women diagnosed with coronary heart
disease within the past four years were less likely to be
sexually active than women without CHD.
By warding off disease, improving your hormonal health,
and strengthening your biological systems, satisfying sex
could be the secret to a longer life. In a study at Duke
University that followed 252 women and men over twenty-
five years, researchers looked for predictors of longevity. For
women, the three most significant factors associated with
greater longevity were good health, physical well-being, and
past enjoyment—not frequency—of sexual activity. This is all
the more reason why you should honor your cyclical nature in
your sex life. When you’re in sync with your cycle, you’ll love
your sexy time more and could live longer.
Orgasm and Your Biological Systems
Biological System 1: Brain. The big O is both a turn-on
and a turn-off for your brain. What does that mean?
Achieving orgasm activates a flood of mood-boosting
neurochemicals—oxytocin (the bonding hormone linked
to passion, intuition, and social skills), serotonin, and
dopamine—that make you go “ahhh.” But 2005 research
from a team of scientists at Groningen University in the
Netherlands shows that many regions of the brain switch
off during female orgasm. Specifically, activity in the
amygdala, hippocampus, and prefrontal cortex—areas
involved in fear, anxiety, emotions, memory, and
alertness—goes dark. For those few brief seconds, you
can finally forget about your to-do list and all your
worries and just enjoy the moment. Having sex on a
regular basis could also make you smarter. A 2010 study
in PLOS ONE found that having regular sex promotes
neurogenesis in the hippocampus, an area associated with
learning and memory. Numerous studies, including 2011
research in the journal Nature, have concluded that
neurogenesis, which is the creation of new neurons,
improves cognition. Orgasm also sparks the release of the
hormone DHEA, which improves brain function,
balances the immune system, helps maintain and repair
tissue, and promotes healthy skin. Syncing with your
cycle as your hormones and neurochemistry change each
month helps you achieve orgasm on a more consistent
basis so you can benefit from these positive impacts.
Biological System 2: Immune system. Who needs
megadoses of vitamin C when sex boosts infection-
fighting cells by up to 30 percent? Having frequent sex
can help you stave off cold and flu bugs. A 2004
Psychological Reports study of 112 college students
showed that those who had sexual intercourse once or
twice a week had immunoglobulin A (IgA) levels higher
than those who were abstinent or had sex less than once a
week. A pair of studies in 2015 found a fascinating
connection between sexual activity, the immune system,
and the chances for conception. Researchers looked at
thirty women—half who were sexually active and half
who abstained from sex. The women who had regular sex
saw changes in immune system activity that promoted
conception, while those who were celibate showed no
such changes. The two studies found that in sexually
active women specific types of immune cells known as
Type 1 helper T cells and IgA cells that fight foreign
invaders are more abundant during the follicular phase of
the cycle—helping to ward off infections, viral bugs, and
bacterial invaders. During the luteal phase, however,
there was a rise in the levels of Type 2 helper T cells and
IgG cells, which help the body accept the sperm and fetus
rather than viewing them as “invaders.” In the women
who weren’t sexually active, this shift in immune system
cells didn’t take place.
Sexual activity also provides lymphatic massage,
which is critical for a healthy immune system, and
enhances the body’s natural detoxification process.
Lymphatic massage improves digestion and moods and
helps prevent cancer.
Biological System 3: Metabolism. If you want to slim
down, you may want to ramp up your bedroom activities.
We all know that sex burns calories—well, okay, only
about 69 calories for women—but did you know sex is
also linked with a healthy BMI? A 2004 study in the
Journal of Sex & Marital Therapy showed that frequent
sexual activity—whether with your partner or solo—is
associated with a smaller waist and hip circumference in
both women and men. Remember that your metabolism
changes from the first half of your cycle to the second
half, so your sexual encounters may burn more or fewer
calories depending on the time of the month.
Biological System 4: Microbiome. Having sex doesn’t
necessarily affect your microbiome, but your gut health
can impact your desire for sex. An imbalanced
microbiome is associated with mood disorders, sleep
problems, and numerous health conditions, according to
research in a 2015 issue of Clinical Psychopharmacology
and Neuroscience. These issues all combine to sabotage
your sex drive. On the other hand, a balanced microbiome
contributes to healthy hormone and neurotransmitter
production throughout your cycle. This leads to better
moods, which are more likely to boost your sex drive.
Biological System 5: Stress response. It comes as no
surprise that getting busy reduces stress. You can feel it
when you have one of those toe-curling orgasms. Science
credits the surge of oxytocin for this. What’s more
intriguing is that increased levels of this feel-good
neurotransmitter can alter an individual’s response to
stress, according to a 2002 study in Sexual and
Relationship Therapy. In her 2000 book, Women’s
Sexualities, psychologist Ellison interviewed 2,632
American women between the ages of twenty-three and
ninety and found that 39 percent of those who
masturbated reported doing so to relax.
The stress reduction action is so powerful, it can also
help you sleep. Most of us think it’s just men who have
sex and then nod off soon after, but women also
experience post-coital relaxation and better z’s. The
cocktail of neurohormones released during sexual activity
induces relaxation to help you fall asleep, and an increase
in the production of estrogen is associated with deeper
REM cycles. If you’re having trouble falling asleep,
snuggle up to your partner or engage in solo play to help
you get some shut-eye. In Ellison’s work, 32 percent of
women who said they masturbated in the previous three
months did so to help them go to sleep. You can use your
orgasms to biohack your sleep and relaxation throughout
your cycle.
When you follow the steps in this chapter, you will
discover a new positive relationship with your fluctuating
sexual needs and desires, and you will no longer feel
unnecessarily frustrated or confused. By understanding your
biology, honoring your cycle and relationship stages,
nourishing your sex hormones, and keeping your partner in the
loop, your sex drive and sexual response will become more
predictable, so you can start maximizing your enjoyment.
Learning to work with your body’s sexual cycle does more
than just supercharge your sex life and give you more mind-
blowing orgasms; it opens you up to another powerful way of
energizing your biochemistry and fueling your creative nature
that you can carry over into the other areas of your life.
Chapter 9
Making Motherhood Easier
I want them to see a mother who loves them dearly,
who invests in them, but who also invests in herself.
It’s just as much about letting them know as young
women that it is okay to put yourself a little higher
on your priority list.
—MICHELLE OBAMA
I
s there anything you wouldn’t do for your child? Would you
wake up early to bake two dozen gluten-free cupcakes for your
first-grader’s class bake sale? Would you help your middle-
schooler complete a mind-boggling STEM homework project
after you’ve had a long day at work? Drive your high school
freshman fifty miles in hellish traffic for a volleyball
tournament? Of course you would! And if you couldn’t, you’d
be wracked with mom guilt, feeling that you should have done
more for your kids. We all want to be the best moms and give
our kids the best of everything. But in addition, “popular mom”
culture creates pressure to be perfect. Almost every message we
see in the media, on mommy blogs, or on social media says we
should be able to do everything for our kids without a hitch,
look flawless while doing it, and love every minute of it. As a
result, we are constantly feeling stressed and comparing
ourselves to other moms. No matter how much you do for your
kids, you’ll find images of some other mom who seems to be
doing more—Instagram-worthy school projects, too-cute kiddie
fashionistas, magazine-worthy school lunch bento boxes.
Seeing these images makes you aspire to do more, but if you’re
trying to get it all done based on just the 24-hour clock, you
will be left feeling exhausted and depleted.
Even though we’re biologically made for motherhood, we
need to acknowledge that the idea of the perfect mom is a myth.
How are you supposed to be a sexy wife, kick-ass entrepreneur,
mindful meditator, organic cook, fitness goddess, and doting
mommy at all times? It’s a lot. Trying to do it all week in and
week out will put you on the expressway to exhaustion. And if
you’re dragging yourself to PTA meetings, soccer practices, and
school plays while relying on your morning caramel latte to jolt
you awake and your evening chardonnay to calm you down,
you aren’t doing yourself or your family any favors. Being
stressed, sick, or zonked out from fatigue keeps you from being
the best mom possible. In fact, it makes you more likely to lash
out at your kids, be late again picking them up after piano
practice, or be emotionally zoned out when you’re supposed to
be enjoying quality time. You are the heart and soul of the
family unit. Your moods, energy, and words impact your
children in long-lasting ways. This is the reason you need to rid
yourself of the notion that you should sacrifice your health and
well-being in order to do it all for your kids. Instead, you
should live by those instructions you hear every time you fly:
“Put your own oxygen mask on first.” Practicing cycle-specific
self-care is like putting on your oxygen mask. It won’t give you
more time in your day, but it will provide the foundation that
gives you the optimized health and energy you need to be the
best mom possible without the burnout. It also takes the
pressure off from the never-ending to-do list and helps you
prioritize, delegate, and set boundaries so things get done with
less stress. Factoring in your infradian clock offers a more
sustainable blueprint for motherhood, allowing you to draw on
the unique gifts of each phase of your cycle so you can give
your kids what they need when you’re best able to offer it—no
guilt required!
Wired for Motherhood
It isn’t just society that drives us to go the extra mile for our
kids. This drive is coded into our brain. Did you know that
motherhood produces the most dramatic neurobiological
changes in a woman’s life? These structural and neurochemical
changes, which encourage and support maternal caregiving and
bonding, are far more profound than those that occur in puberty.
We’re all familiar with the awkward transition to adolescence,
when our hormones are raging and our skin, body, and
emotions act out accordingly. We treat adolescents with
compassion and understanding during this time, because we
know their whole way of thinking and viewing the world is
changing and they’re adjusting to their new hormonal reality.
But the transition to motherhood? That remains largely a
mystery. In a 2018 TED talk, reproductive psychiatrist
Alexandra Sacks said, “There are entire textbooks written about
the developmental arc of adolescence, and we don’t even have a
word to describe the transition to motherhood. We need one.”
Matrescence is the term she’s encouraging us to adopt, and it
deserves just as much attention as we give to puberty. After all,
it’s when you’ll undergo the most sweeping neurobiological
changes of your adult life—even more than what you can
expect from menopause, which gets a lot more attention. Yes,
we have lots of books, websites, and support groups that go into
glorious detail about what you can expect your body to go
through during pregnancy, birth, and postpartum, but most of
them don’t delve into the mind-altering, neurochemical aspect
of this transition to motherhood (Angela Garbes’s Like a
Mother is a welcome exception). This lack of information
leaves us ill-prepared for these dynamic changes, wondering
why we no longer feel like ourselves, and too often assuming
something is wrong with us. In The Boston Globe’s Globe
Magazine, journalist Chelsea Conaboy eloquently explored the
radical transformation she experienced in her journey as a new
mom, writing, “I feared that something deep within me—my
disposition, my way of seeing the world, myself—had been
altered. In truth, something very foundational had changed: my
brain.”
As scientific evidence on the changes in the maternal brain
start to trickle in, it’s becoming clearer that motherhood rewires
our brain. That’s what researchers concluded in a 2016 study in
Hormones and Behavior that looked at the brains of new moms
in the first, third, and fourth months postpartum. Several brain
regions involved in important aspects of caregiving—maternal
motivation and reward processing, sensory processing,
empathy, and regulating emotions—increased in size
throughout the study. Some of these brain changes may
influence the anxiety and hyper-vigilance many new moms
experience in the first few weeks postpartum, according to 2013
research in Infant Mental Health Journal. In this study,
researchers suggested that this intense worrying tends to
diminish after a few months.
Some of this rewiring, however, sticks around long after the
early postpartum period. In a 2016 study in Nature
Neuroscience, investigators used magnetic resonance imaging
to look at the brains of women who were hoping to become
pregnant. They conducted follow-up brain imaging tests after
the women gave birth and compared those images with women
who had not become pregnant. The brains of those who had
given birth showed dramatic changes in gray matter volume
that correlated to increased measures of maternal attachment,
and these differences remained two years later in a subsequent
follow-up. The differences were so clear that the researchers
could easily distinguish which women had given birth based
solely on the brain images.
Powerful neurochemicals also get in on the act to program
us to bond with our babies and compel us to focus our attention
on them like a laser. A 2014 study in Scientific Reports
confirmed that oxytocin, the same compound that surges when
you have an orgasm, is also released while you’re
breastfeeding, and fosters strong emotional bonding. Research
has shown that for some women, simply hearing their baby cry
initiates a let-down reflex that causes breast milk to start
flowing. And groundbreaking research in a 2017 issue of
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences found that
dopamine, another mood-boosting brain chemical, is involved
in the mother-child bonding process. All these things taking
place in your brain serve an evolutionary purpose—making you
ideally fit for the monumental job of keeping a tiny human
alive. But when your brain is programmed to be overattentive,
it can be easy to go overboard.
The Pursuit of Perfection
Are we doomed to think we aren’t good enough as mothers?
Are we programmed to strive to be better caregivers for the rest
of our lives? Every bit of progress we make in the mom
department is immediately followed by yet more yearning to
improve. It’s an endless pursuit of perfection, a lifetime of
suffering. In her book The Gifts of Imperfection, Brené Brown
writes, “Understanding the difference between healthy striving
and perfectionism is critical to laying down the shield and
picking up your life. Research shows that perfectionism
hampers success. In fact, it’s often the path to depression,
anxiety, addiction, and life paralysis.”
I understand the deep-seated desire to be the perfect mom,
wife, friend, and career woman. I grew up with a productivity
queen as a role model. My mom had a full-time job while also
being a hands-on mom. Maybe being an immigrant spurred her
to be in perpetual motion. She was indefatigable—whipping up
hot meals three times a day, taking us to school and activities,
and keeping the home perfectly clean and orderly. It’s hard to
fathom now, but I never ever ate at a restaurant until I moved
out of our family home. When my mom wasn’t at her job, she
was bustling around the kitchen, doing laundry, taking me
clothes shopping at the outlet, or getting crafty with some other
project around the house. She was the most enterprising person
I knew and was extremely creative in finding ways to stretch a
dollar. She was so productive I never saw her sit down for more
than the time it took to drink a cup of tea in the afternoon. Talk
about living in perpetual productivity! But she was motivated to
do all this because she had a deep desire to help her children
realize their potential.
Like all moms of that generation, along with all the
grandmothers and great-grandmothers who came before her,
she was winging it in a society that was even more steeped in
male-centered culture than we are today. Betty Friedan’s 1963
landmark book, The Feminine Mystique, blew the cover off the
plight of the stifled American housewife-mother, exploring the
underlying cultural beliefs that forced women to conform to an
idealized domestic role. The book depicted widespread
dissatisfaction among unfulfilled women who were living
zombie-like lives that prevented them from realizing their full
potential. When women broke into corporate America,
however, they felt stifled in a new way. On top of having to do
it all at home, now they had do it all at work, reinforcing the
belief that there was not enough time and that they had to
suffer. With paying jobs during the day, largely invisible work
at home, and the mental overload of managing all the details for
both jobs, most moms then and now have been wound up tight.
They don’t have enough time, and they have no way to manage
their energy, let alone factor in meaningful self-care. And
worse, these moms feel guilty for not being the best, happiest,
most “together” moms they want to be. We carry these wounds
intergenerationally. We’re still trying to figure out how to make
all these roles fit together. There is a better way. Today, we are
still healing from the wounds our female ancestors suffered. But
we have an amazing opportunity to change our story and chart a
new path for ourselves and our daughters.
I’m completely awed whenever I think of all the women
who came before us who had to face hormonal health issues, a
male-centered society, and the cult of perfection with absolutely
no help. They must have felt so drained and depleted. I am so
grateful to have found these insights into our biochemistry that
we can now use to biohack like a mother. One of the most
important lessons you can learn from listening to your inner
biology is that you don’t have to do everything all at once. This
outdated concept of “doing it all in order to have it all” fed into
the notion that we have to aspire to perfection. It’s important to
understand that syncing with your cycle isn’t a method to help
you get more organized so you can do all the things you think
you should be doing. This cyclical practice is instead intended
to help you get in tune with your inner wisdom and to make
choices not just from your head but also from your center—
your body, your heart, your hormones. Your biology will guide
you to do what you want to do in a sustainable way, and helps
you reorganize things you don’t want to do, can’t do, or need
help doing. I would like to see us continue to evolve the
narrative around motherhood to be more supported on all
fronts, rather than that of self-sacrifice and burnout. If we truly
want to honor our mothers and all the other women who came
before us, what could be a better way than to create a new
reality where we can be whole, integrated women living in tune
with our biology?
Let Your Cyclical Nature Guide Your
Mothering Style
I inherited my mom’s perpetually active attitude, and I can
easily fall back into this mode. I have a big appetite for life. I
want to have a successful career and a strong relationship. I
want to be a great mom who is fully engaged whenever I’m
with my child. I want to be cooking homemade meals and
keeping a beautiful home that looks as though it jumped off the
pages of a magazine. And I want to have a fun social life. I
want it all. But when I list all these desires out this way, I
realize having all these expectations is a little crazy. How am I
supposed to project-map all of this? How can I accomplish it all
without draining my energy?
The cyclical way of living lets me practice the art of
discernment. I do more of what’s important to me as a mother
—just at different times of the month. Letting your cycle
provide a blueprint for a more effortless way to achieve your
mom goals is the best way to prevent you from getting sucked
back into the cult of perfection. Each phase of your cycle
infuses you with unique talents and abilities that you can draw
on to plan activities with your children, inform your parenting
style, and tackle domestic tasks. Tapping into the natural
strengths my cycle brings makes me a happier, more effective,
and more fulfilled mom. When I map out activities and tasks in
a phase-by-phase matrix, it makes my huge list of goals seem
so much more achievable. By focusing on what I’m naturally
best at each week, I end up getting to most of the items on my
to-do list on a regular basis. Syncing with my cycle helps me
feel that I can juggle more without dropping the ball.
But syncing your motherhood style with your cycle isn’t
just about optimizing your productivity in the domestic arena.
It’s also about having the energy and focus to be emotionally
present with your children regardless of the activity. And
there’s another, even more pressing reason why right-timing is
so important as a mom. As soon as my daughter was born, I
quickly realized she wasn’t going to be a little girl forever. It
wouldn’t be long before she entered her teenage years and then
she’d be off to college. Acknowledging how special this
childhood time is made me even more determined to make the
most of it. Being disorganized or lacking the energy to be
present with her would squander the magical phase of
childhood. Discovering that my cycle provides a natural
structure is like a gift that gives me more time with my
daughter. And what mother doesn’t want more time with her
children?
This process is working for my client Jessie. This thirty-
something pharmacist has found that syncing with her cycle
does so much more than just alleviate period problems.
“Before, I was pushing myself constantly and didn’t realize that
I was digging myself into a hormonal hole after multiple
pregnancies. The Cycle Syncing Method™ has really given me
the opportunity to get the most out of what I’m able to give to
myself and to my family, and to my friends,” she says. “It has
also allowed me to manage the busyness of my life—three kids,
a husband, a business, being an entrepreneur, being a
pharmacist, and having friends. It’s also given me the
perspective of choosing more wisely, as well. I now have
friends that only nurture me. There’s no negative space. I don’t
have any room for any of that. And that’s one big piece of this
—it’s allowed me to manage everything as well as say no and
make a break from those things that were holding me back
before.”
THE MOTHER OF CREATION
Every woman, by virtue of being female and having
access to the infradian clock, possesses the gift of being
able to create something from nothing, to bring life from
the fertile void. Whether you have children or not, you
can apply maternal orientation to your own creative
process. You can learn to be patient, compassionate, and
nurturing with yourself the same way you would be with
a child. The four phases of your cycle provide a guide
for you to complete the creative cycle, and by tapping
into your cyclical nature you can build your energy so
you can bring your creative ideas and projects to fruition
over and over again.
PROTECTING AND IMPROVING YOUR
FERTILITY
If you aren’t a mother yet, or you’re currently trying to
conceive, syncing with your cycle will protect and
preserve your fertility for the long term. This method
offers so many health and hormonal benefits, it can
dramatically improve your reproductive ecosystem and
improve your chances of conception. The earlier you
begin living in sync with your cyclical nature, the easier
time you’ll have when you’re ready to conceive. And
the more aware you are of your life stages and
matrescence, the smoother your transition to
motherhood will be. A cyclical practice can also help
boost progesterone if you have one of the 10 to 15
percent of pregnancies that end in miscarriage. With
balanced hormones and foods that nourish your body,
you will recover faster physically. On the emotional
side, your cyclical practice will give you different ways
to experience your grief and loss across several cycles
as you heal your body and spirit.
Syncing Your Parenting with Each Phase
PHASE 1: PREPARE
Follicular Phase: 7–10 Days
Cyclical Focus: Curiosity
Activity focus: With supercharged energy during the follicular
phase, you’ll be primed to break out of your routine and try
new experiences with your kids—visiting a new museum,
taking a drive in the country, or going apple picking.
Parenting focus: Hormonal changes in the follicular phase lead
you to be more cerebral and ramp up your curiosity, making
this an ideal time to ask more questions when it comes to
parenting. In this phase, it’s also a good idea to break
routines, take novel approaches with your kids, strategize
with them, and find playful solutions if you come up against
any resistance. For example, the other night, I let my three-
year-old daughter know it was time to brush her teeth. I got
out her toothbrush and was going to do it for her when she
folded her arms across her chest and gave me an emphatic
“No!” Instead of just pushing ahead with our usual routine,
though, I paused and asked her why she didn’t want to
brush her teeth. I kept gently probing until she was able to
express that she actually did want to brush her teeth; she
just didn’t want me to brush her teeth for her. It was one of
those aha moments when I learned something new about
her. So now we’ve graduated to letting her brush her own
teeth, and she feels like a big girl doing it. Had I blindly
stuck to the daily routine without inquiring about what was
behind her refusal, I would have missed this new milestone,
and we both would have felt frustrated. Instead, it was a
win-win for both of us.
Domestic focus: The follicular phase is all about newness and
bringing a fresh eye to things. Start planning home projects,
think about what needs to be done this month, and loop
your partner into the planning process. Is there something
you’ve been meaning to do, such as painting a room or
building a bookshelf? Lay out your plans to make it happen.
PHASE 2: OPEN UP
Ovulatory Phase: 3–4 Days
Cyclical Focus: Nurturing and Play
Activity focus: The best time to socialize during your monthly
cycle is the ovulatory phase. Some ways to make the most
of this phase are planning a family barbecue with all the
young cousins, inviting kids over for a play date, visiting a
family member, or planning an outing with other moms and
their kids. In my latest ovulatory phase, I hosted a chess get-
together for my daughter and her friends with an
organization that uses storytelling to teach young kids how
to play the game.
Parenting focus: In this phase, your estrogen’s concentration
level will boost your desire to nurture your kids and show
them extra-focused love and affection. For example, during
this phase you might want to go to a special meal for one-
on-one time, help the kids with a project, or spontaneously
make muffins with them. The ovulatory phase is the time
when your verbal skills spike, so take advantage and use
this time to talk to your kids. Do an emotional check-in and
ask them how they’re feeling and if there’s anything they
want to talk about. You’ll also find it effortless to be a
playful mom at this time, and you can resolve conflicts in a
more physical, playful, lovey-dovey way. My latest game
with my daughter is “mama jaguar and baby jaguar.” If
she’s sitting on the couch and being difficult, I’ll hop on the
couch on all fours and start purring, growling, and nuzzling
at her cheek in a fun way. She just starts laughing, then we
cuddle, and before I know it whatever she was upset about
has been forgotten.
Domestic focus: Your communication and social skills shine
during this phase, so plan that parent-teacher conference,
help your high schooler fill out those college applications,
or have a family meeting when everyone is encouraged to
share whatever’s on their mind.
PHASE 3: WORK
Luteal Phase: 10–14 Days
Cyclical Focus: Collaboration
Activity focus: In the luteal phase, you’re a superwoman when
it comes to checking things off your to-do list. Use this time
to include your kids in domestic chores. Ask them to help
you fold laundry, chop the carrots, or pick up their room.
They’ll be building skills, and it will help you zoom through
your list faster.
Parenting focus: As a parent, this is when I look at my task list
and complete the items on that list. This is the time to give
children the opportunity to learn to enjoy this process by
helping them learn about sequencing, delayed gratification,
skill building, follow-through, and completion. Now is also
the best phase to let your kids practice working through
issues on their own. With my daughter I might let her know
it’s time to wash her hands before dinner. If she doesn’t
follow through, I’ll use love and logic questions with her.
For example, “Do you want to go wash your hands by
yourself, or do you want Mommy to wash them with you?”
She usually thinks about it, and then she’ll follow through
on her own. What’s amazing about this process is that she
senses the underlying rhythm of my mothering phase, and
she can tell when I’ve shifted into this different vibe.
During my luteal phase, she’ll be proactive and will proudly
tell me, “Mom, I washed my hands before you asked me
to!”
Domestic focus: During this phase, you’ll feel a strong desire
to get things in order. Honor that inner voice by getting
organized and completing projects with the kids’ help when
appropriate. Once every quarter during the luteal phase, go
through your children’s closets and swap out those summer
shorts for fall sweaters, or store the winter coats and break
out the spring fashions. I like to do a deep cleaning once a
month and ask my husband to pull out all the furniture so
we can dust in places we can’t reach the rest of the time.
This is also when I tackle school administrative tasks, such
as filling out forms or ordering supplies. I also go through
the pantry and stock up on anything we need. If you’re in
the middle of a project—wallpapering, painting a room, or
framing family photos to hang on the wall—now is the time
to buckle down and see the project through. You—and the
rest of your family—will feel so much better when you get
it done.
PHASE 4: REST
Menstrual Phase: 3–7 Days
Cyclical Focus: Individuation
Activity focus: To be a happy mom, you need some alone time,
and there’s no better phase for that than during
menstruation. Put your partner on bedtime duty with the
kids and relax in the tub, read a page-turner, or tune in to
something really juicy on TV. Giving your children some
solo time is good for them, too. It encourages them to use
their imagination and to entertain themselves. Being alone
doesn’t necessarily mean being apart from each other. For
example, my daughter and I might be sitting together on the
couch, and I’m reading my book while she’s reading hers.
We’re still connected while doing our own thing. In fact, I
think this is great practice for the oncoming pubescent years
when she’s going to have the itch to do things on her own—
teaching us we can still be connected while pursuing
separate interests. Plus, taking even the smallest break can
make you miss your kids like crazy, so you are energized to
come back renewed in the follicular phase.
Parenting focus: During this phase, I really like to lean on my
partner and let him do more so that I can try to replenish
myself. How do you do this if you’re a single parent? Just
try to give yourself one day of your bleed when you hire a
babysitter if you can afford it, get your parents to come
over, or leave your kids with your best friend for a night.
Then you will have the opportunity to take a nap, go out to
dinner by yourself, go to the movies, get a massage, or
whatever will help refuel your resources.
Domestic focus: Your hormones align at this time to encourage
analysis and evaluation. But in contrast with the ovulatory
phase, when you ask questions and engage in conversation
to explore issues, this process during the menstrual phase is
about listening to your inner wisdom, your intuition. Do you
have a weird feeling that something is going on with your
kid at school? Has anything fallen off your radar with your
self-care, relationship, finances, or friends? In the menstrual
phase, your heightened intuition gives you the insights you
need to catch things that need to be addressed. You’re the
CEO of your family, and it’s important to evaluate all the
things that go into making a happy, healthy home. This is
also an ideal time to remind yourself of everything that’s
gone right in the previous month.
The Cycle Syncing Method™: Mom FLO
FOLLICULAR OVULATORY LUTEAL MENSTRUAL
Curiosity Nurturing and Collaboration Individuation
Duration: 7–10 Playfulness Duration: Duration: 3–7
Days Duration: 3–4 10–14 Days Days
Days
Plan out the
family calendar Attend family Let kids help Enjoy alone
for the month events. with chores. time.
ahead.
Go somewhere Arrange play Support your Give your
new. dates. kids to children solo
practice time.
problem
solving.
Encourage
Ask questions to
your kids to
learn more Ask for help
Be playful with practice
about your from a partner
your kids. follow-
children’s or friend.
through on
needs.
tasks.
Handle
Try a new Get physical
school-related Up your self-
activity as a and have a
administrative care.
family. dance party.
tasks.
Tune in to your
Plan meals for Tackle a
Cultivate social children and
the month domestic
community. feel how they
ahead. project.
are doing.
Organize
Make new Have a family Evaluate family
children’s
recipes. meeting. priorities.
closets.
Keep Your Life Stage in Mind
Your cyclical nature goes beyond your 28-day clock and
also applies to the overarching seasonality of your
feminine expression as you go through life. Think of the
28-day cycle as your own personal biological creation
matrix that impacts your energy throughout your lifetime.
From childhood to young adulthood, motherhood to
“golden girl”—each of these life stages is tied to hormonal
shifts in your body that impact the rhythms of your energy,
vitality, and creativity. These hormonal shifts also affect
neurotransmitters and shape the female brain, according to
a 2015 review in Frontiers in Neuroscience. One of the
best benefits of living with cyclical awareness is that it
reduces stress by giving you permission to focus on the
things that matter most to you. Similarly, keeping in mind
where you are in terms of your life stage frees you up to
embrace what’s important to you at any particular stage.
Cyclical awareness provides a guide to the seasonality of
life and increases your understanding that there’s a time to
push hard in your career and a time to seek more balance,
a time to develop forever friendships and a time to nest
with your baby. The need to honor your life stage often
becomes most evident during matrescence, when you may
be struggling with your new identity as a mom. Ignoring
the seasonal reality of your life can ramp up stress and
guilt while putting your health at risk. There’s no other
time in your life when you’re more likely to put others’
needs first than when you become a mother. You may feel
guilty about not doing enough for your kids, but on the
other side you feel anxious that you aren’t accomplishing
enough in life, aren’t being a good enough friend, and
aren’t giving your partner enough attention. This is the
essential tension of motherhood.
Getting in tune with your seasonal life stage also ties in
with the notion of right-timing and managing your energy.
Right-timing applies not only to how you schedule your
days, but also to where you focus your energy throughout
your lifetime. Trusting your hormonal clock, and letting it
guide you in shifting priorities, is very grounding and
reassuring. Your hormonal clock gives you permission to
say no to the extra work projects or the night out with the
girls. Of course you can try to find other ways to connect
with friends. Just don’t beat yourself up for not being
“perfect” in every area of your life at all times. When
things start feeling overwhelming, ask yourself: Where am
I in my cycle? Where am I in my life stage? As spiritual
teacher Ram Dass wrote in his seminal 1971 book of the
same title, “Be here now.” Honor your biology and let it
guide you.
Going through the transitions from one life stage to the
next can be challenging because they signal profound
shifts in your identity. And no change is bigger and more
culturally unsupported than going from sexual and carefree
young woman to responsible, overstressed mother. This
change can rock your foundation, especially if you haven’t
been taking care of yourself hormonally. The good news is
it’s never too late to start tuning in to your biological inner
clocks.
Being aware of the changes that will come with each
stage and preparing for them by nourishing your hormones
can help ease these transitions. The women in your own
family can give you a glimpse of what’s to come. Jean
Liedloff, an author who spent more than two years living
in the South American jungle with an intergenerational
tribe, wrote in The Continuum Concept: In Search of
Happiness Lost that every person in their culture was able
to learn from older individuals while mentoring younger
people. According to Liedloff, this provided for a
smoother transition from one life stage to the next.
Growing up in an intergenerational household that
included your mom and grandma, for example, would
have provided you with a model for what the different life
stages look like. Back in 1950, about 21 percent of
Americans lived with two or more adult generations in a
single household, according to a Pew Research Center
analysis of census data. That number plummeted to 12
percent in 1980, so most of you reading this book probably
didn’t grow up with multiple generations of women at
home that you could emulate. The number of
multigenerational households has gradually been inching
its way back up, however, and reached a record 64 million
people, or one in five Americans, in 2016. Being part of
the “sandwich generation” living with your parents and
your children definitely brings its own challenges, but it
allows you—and your daughter, if you have one—to see
that there’s a right-timing aspect to a woman’s life in
addition to the monthly cycle. This awareness is especially
helpful in motherhood, when you really need to honor all
of your inner clocks. If you didn’t have this
intergenerational transmission of wisdom and you have
uncertainty about what’s to come, you can have anxiety
about change in general—this is the same lack of
preparation that leaves us feeling blindsided by or
negatively about our puberty experience. Let’s look to our
biology to help give us confidence about how to navigate
change successfully.
The Eight Hormonal Life Transitions
Childhood (Birth to About 12)
Body focus: During childhood, a girl’s body, brain, and
endocrine system undergo rapid development. The
pituitary gland in the brain releases a growth hormone that
causes kids to sprout taller. Thyroid hormone enables cells
—especially those in the brain—to develop and function
properly. The adrenal glands kick into action around
middle childhood—a transition called adrenarche—and
begin pumping out DHEA, which is critical for brain
development, according to 2011 research in Human
Nature. During childhood, girls are operating on a 24-hour
biological clock the same way boys are.
Can I sync with my cycle during childhood? Since
young girls are operating on a 24-hour biological clock,
there is no need to cycle sync at this stage. However, a
poor diet and exposure to endocrine disruptors in
childhood could spell trouble when puberty hits. I
recommend auditing your daughter’s food intake and
eliminating her exposure to endocrine disruptors starting
as early as possible to lay the foundation for happier
hormones.
Lifestyle focus: Everything is new and exciting during
this stage. At first, life is all about mommy and daddy, but
that changes in middle childhood when girls go to school
and develop emotional, intellectual, and social skills and
begin the process of individuation.
Puberty (About 12 to 21 Years Old)
Body focus: A girl’s first period signals the wondrous
beginning of her life as a cyclical creature in which she
adds a monthly hormonal clock to her existing 24-hour
clock. In the US, 90 percent of girls begin menstruating by
age 13.75, with the median age for menarche at 12.4 years
of age, according to 2003 research in Pediatrics. Fewer
than 10 percent of girls have their first period before their
eleventh birthday. Several factors may influence an earlier
onset of puberty and menarche. Studies in the journals
Pediatrics and Pediatrics Research show that a higher
body mass index in girls may be related to budding breasts
and the sprouting of pubic hair at a younger age. Other
factors associated with an earlier age of menarche include
exposure to endocrine disruptors, having a mom who
smoked during pregnancy, growing up with one or more
smokers in your household, and lower socioeconomic
status. On the flip side, eating disorders, high levels of
physical activity, and malnutrition have been associated
with delayed menarche, according to a 2010 review in
Reproductive Biology and Endocrinology.
When a girl first starts menstruating, it’s not
uncommon for the menstrual cycle to arrive in an irregular
pattern. The median cycle length for adolescents is 32.2
days, but intervals ranging from twenty-one days to forty-
five days are considered normal, according to the
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. It
takes time for the hypothalamic-pituitary-ovulatory axis to
build up enough of a hormonal concentration so a girl can
ovulate and menstruate regularly. Within three years of
menarche, 60 to 80 percent of girls will see their cycle
length adjust to twenty-one to thirty-four days, which is
similar to the patterns in adult women, according to 2003
research in Human Reproductive Update. The American
College for Obstetricians and Gynecologists recommends
teen girls monitor their menstrual cycles with the support
of their health care practitioner. In the early stages, it can
provide important information on health issues that need
early diagnosis and understanding. If period problems
arise during this stage, avoid suppressing the developing
hormonal and cyclical processes with synthetic birth
control. Refer to the Biohacking Tool Kit to help your teen
nurture her hormones and save her years of suffering, time,
and expense trying to get her cycle back on track.
Can I sync with my cycle during puberty? As a culture
we’re all too quick to assume that any issues with the
menstrual cycle during this life stage need to be regulated
with medication—namely, synthetic birth control pills.
The birth control pill only masks reproductive health
issues and delays proper treatment and care. Instead of
jumping on the pill bandwagon, we need to do a better job
of teaching girls and young women how diet and lifestyle
changes can heal hormonal issues.
Lifestyle focus: This is a heady time for exploration,
learning, new adventures, and discovering your identity.
During this stage, teenage girls tend to shift their attention
from their family to friends, who take on a much more
important and influential role in their lives. Lifetime
friendships are often forged during this stage.
Adult Menstrual Years (21 to 35 Years Old)
Body focus: During this life stage, the average menstrual
cycle occurs every twenty-one to thirty-four days and lasts
about two to seven days. This is the time to take action if
the symptoms you had in puberty, such as cramps, PMS, or
acne, didn’t get addressed or don’t resolve on their own, or
if you begin developing new symptoms. Taking action
isn’t just about alleviating your symptoms so you can have
easier periods; it’s about preserving your fertility and
setting yourself up to be able to unlock your hormonal
advantage in every area of your life.
Can I sync with my cycle as an adult? As an adult, you
have the opportunity to harness the potential of your
feminine biochemistry by living in sync with your cycle.
Lifestyle focus: This is an exciting time of life when
you’ll likely be moving out on your own, getting your
career off the ground, and diving in and out of passionate
romances. You may have more exposure to alcohol and
caffeine, both of which affect your hormones, so pay
attention to their effect on you, and limit or eliminate them
for optimal hormonal health.
Pregnancy (Age Varies)
Body focus: The female body is awe-inspiring when it
comes to making tiny humans. Following implantation of a
fertilized egg, your body’s hormone production factory
undergoes radical changes. About eight days after
ovulation, your inner biological boss fires up production of
human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG), which instructs
your ovaries to halt the release of a mature egg each
month. The primary job of hCG is to preserve the corpus
luteum so it can dramatically ramp up the release of
estrogen and progesterone in order to support pregnancy.
In early pregnancy, your body produces hCG at a furious
pace, peaking at about eight to ten weeks before lowering
and leveling off for the final two trimesters. After hCG
production tops out, the placenta takes over production of
estrogen and progesterone. Estrogen helps regulate other
key hormones, supports the development and nourishment
of the fetus, increases blood flow to the uterus, and
contributes to the development of milk ducts.
Unfortunately, it’s also to blame for the nausea many
women experience in the first trimester. Higher levels of
progesterone suppress the maternal immune response so
the mother’s body won’t reject the fetus as a “foreign
invader.” Higher levels of progesterone also maintains the
placenta and buildup of endometrial lining, helps the
uterus expand to support a growing fetus, and boosts your
mood. This important hormone also plays a role in
preventing miscarriages by stopping preterm uterine
contractions. A 2017 study in Fertility & Sterility found
that two-thirds of women who used a progesterone
supplement prior to getting pregnant successfully
delivered full-term babies even though they had previously
suffered multiple miscarriages. If you’re so exhausted you
can’t stay awake, you can blame it on this key hormone,
because it tends to act like a sleeping pill. Your changing
hormonal levels may also enlarge your breasts, darken the
areolas, and increase breast sensitivity and tenderness.
Fluid retention and swelling are common as a pregnancy
progresses, as are a litany of other changes.
A lesser-known but magical short- and long-term gift
of pregnancy is that fetal heart and brain cells are found in
the maternal heart and brain permanently. The fetal heart
cells help heal the maternal heart after it doubles in size
during pregnancy, and they undoubtedly facilitate
emotional resonance between mother and child. The fetal
brain cells give you that psychic link to your child so you
can understand them before they are verbal and/or when
they’re not communicating as they get older—truly it’s
biology at its most poetic.
A number of other hormones get involved in the baby-
making process. Thyroid production increases to help with
metabolism and the regulation of steroid hormones.
Human placental lactogen (hPL) causes changes in your
breasts to support breastfeeding and plays a role in your
body’s metabolism to provide adequate nourishment to the
fetus. During labor, oxytocin stimulates the uterine
contractions that push your new baby out of the womb.
Your body intuitively knows what to do, but things can go
haywire if you haven’t addressed any existing hormonal
imbalances. You can—and should—feel great during
pregnancy, but it usually requires some preparation. If
you’re a hormonally sensitive person like me with my
diagnosis of PCOS, it’s even more important to prep for
pregnancy, as you may be more susceptible to postpartum
hormonal changes.
PLACENTA POWER
For far too many years, our culture has devalued the
female body, its cyclical nature, and the birth process. Just
look at the placenta, for example. This life-sustaining
temporary organ, which nourishes the fetus during
pregnancy, has traditionally been considered medical
waste. Can you believe that? Many hospitals routinely
dispose of it after birth like trash. This practice really
irritates me because this amazing organ holds so much
potential. Futurist tech innovators and other major
influencers, including self-help guru Tony Robbins, are
finally waking up to the placenta’s immense power.
Robbins raved in a 2018 Facebook post that he had
received the transformative benefits of placental stem cell
therapy, saying, “Stem cells saved my shoulder after
struggling with excruciating pain from spinal stenosis and,
more recently, a torn rotator cuff. Stem cell treatment is
truly a next-level health innovation that can reverse the
wear and tear we put on our bodies and prevent
debilitating disease and injury from escalating further. This
technological advancement will impact humanity in life-
changing ways—it has the potential to transform and save
MILLIONS of lives!” Robbins has teamed up with Dr.
Peter Diamandis, cofounder of Human Longevity Inc. and
one of Fortune magazine’s World’s 50 Greatest Leaders, to
deliver placental stem cell therapy to consumers. Just as
pharmaceutical companies pay consumers for their health
data, women should be compensated for donating their
placentas, and more women should get funding to do more
research in this area. I can only hope this is just the first
step in a major shift in thinking to view the female body as
the ultimate, life-giving power source.
Can I sync with my cycle during pregnancy? No,
absolutely not! However, I suggest you prep your body for
pregnancy with phase-specific diet and lifestyle changes at
least three months, but preferably a year, prior to trying to
conceive. By fixing hormonal symptoms before that
pregnancy test shows a positive result, you can increase
your chances of a healthier, happier pregnancy.
Lifestyle focus: In the pregnancy phase, you’re basically
in an extended quasiluteal phase for forty weeks, which is
why you have the desire to nest. You’re literally nesting a
human being, and then you’ll nest your home. You’ll be
nesting everything. You’ll get so turned on by getting
things done—planning the baby shower, organizing the
nursery, and filling the closet with baby clothes.
Postpartum (Age Varies)
Body focus: After your baby makes a grand entrance into
the world, your hormone levels change dramatically, and
you experience a rapid decline in estrogen levels,
according to research in Behavioural Brain Research.
Prolactin kicks in to stimulate your breasts to produce
breast milk. Each time you breastfeed, your brain releases
the powerful bonding hormone oxytocin, which
strengthens your connection with your baby. Your first
period post-delivery could arrive in six to eight weeks if
you aren’t breastfeeding. But if you are breastfeeding, your
menstrual cycle may take some time to return. Among the
women I work with, it takes an average of six months for
the menstrual cycle to reestablish itself. Mine didn’t come
back for nine months. Research in a 2015 review in CNS
Spectrums on the role of reproductive hormones in
postpartum depression and anxiety suggests that some
women who are “hormone sensitive” may be more at risk
for developing this condition. In my experience with
thousands of women, I’ve noted that the way you’ve been
eating, exercising, and scheduling your life for the decade
leading up to giving birth either helps protect you from
developing postpartum mood issues or makes you more
vulnerable to them. The way you nourish your body
postpartum can make a difference, too.
Can I sync with my cycle postpartum? Do not cycle
sync postpartum! Think of the first three months after
giving birth as an extended menstrual phase. Focus your
diet on warm cooked foods, including healthy fats, protein,
and nutrient-dense fare. Think bone broth, liver paté, red
meat, warm oatmeal, avocados, whole eggs, and coconut
oil. This is not the time for salads, smoothies, or raw fruit
—nothing cold! Forget trying to lose the baby weight by
eating light. It won’t work. You might think these hearty
foods would make you pack on more pounds, but they
helped me quickly lose sixty pounds of baby weight
without trying. My post-baby eating plan also helped me
avoid the mood swings that can arise from my hormone
sensitivity. As soon as your period comes back and you are
at least six months postpartum, you can then begin syncing
with your cycle again.
Lifestyle focus: During this stage, your life can feel like it
completely revolves around that tiny bundle of crying,
eating, pooping joy. Try your best not to put pressure on
yourself to attend to work, romance, and friendships
perfectly while you’re getting adjusted to being a mom.
Perimenopause Phase 1 (About 35 to 45 Years
Old)
Body focus: The second clock unwinding process begins
as early as your midthirties. Your body is still producing
enough hormones to give you good energy, sex drive, skin
tone, and muscle tone, but subtle changes are under way
inside your ovaries. Ovarian reserve—the number of
remaining follicles and eggs in your ovaries—may begin
to dwindle. As your egg supply diminishes, cells within
your ovaries secrete lower amounts of two key hormones
—inhibin B and anti-Müllerian—which may cause
occasional elevation of FSH levels during the follicular
phase of your cycle, according to 2017 research in JAMA.
With so many women over thirty-five having children,
clearly how you care for your hormones greatly impacts
your fertility during this stage. During this life stage, your
cycle may still be arriving like clockwork every month, or
it could begin to vary in length. In the later years of this
phase, you could skip a period entirely.
Can I sync with my cycle in perimenopause phase 1?
Yes! If you’re already in the perimenopausal phase of your
life and are just learning about the concept of living in
sync with your cycle, you need to start doing it now! If
you’ve been eating, exercising, and managing your energy
according to your cycle, you may not experience any
symptoms during this phase. If you’ve been neglecting or
ignoring your female cyclical nature, however, your body
will let you know it. You could be dealing with fertility
problems, vaginal dryness, crepe-like or wrinkled skin, or
bone-dry hair. This is your body’s way of giving you a
heads-up that underlying problems need to be addressed.
Don’t expect to solve your skin and hair issues at the spa
or salon. The problem is more than skin-deep. It is critical
to start biohacking your way to better-balanced hormones
before you transition into the second phase of
perimenopause, or you could be faced with unnecessarily
intense symptoms. By taking charge of your health now
with phase-specific foods and supplements, you can avoid
many of the effects of premature hormonal aging and can
reduce the likelihood of developing symptoms in the late
phase of perimenopause. You can also slow down this
process and delay menopause. A 2018 study in the Journal
of Epidemiology and Community Health concluded that a
diet high in fish and legumes delays the onset of
menopause by more than three years, whereas eating
refined rice and pasta results in an earlier end to your
reproductive years. A high intake of vitamin B6 and zinc
was also associated with a later age at menopause.
Lifestyle focus: By now you’re hitting your stride in
motherhood, career, and romance. When your hormones
are optimized and you’re honoring your cyclical nature,
you can make it all work with less effort and feel more
energized than ever. This can also be a time when you
begin a journey back to the self. Psychologist Marion
Woodman has written extensively about how women in
midlife move away from focusing on external things and
seeking external validation, and instead turn inward.
Embrace this transition, and get to know yourself better.
Perimenopause Phase 2 (45 to 55 Years Old)
Body focus: As the infradian clock unwinds itself
permanently, your hormone levels change even more
dramatically. Over time, your body will make more and
more FSH, and you will eventually stop having a 28-day
cycle. By the time you reach perimenopause phase two,
your ovarian reserve has shrunk, making pregnancy less
likely but not out of the question. FSH levels rise, causing
follicles to mature faster and shortening the follicular
phase; luteal progesterone levels fall; estrogen production
can remain steady or become erratic; and testosterone
levels decline. These changes can all lead to more irregular
cycles. Eventually, FSH levels rise to the point where you
no longer ovulate. You may skip two or more cycles, going
more than sixty days without a period. Your period may
also increase or decrease in duration or be heavier or
lighter in flow. This transition can be a relatively smooth
one with your changing hormone levels remaining
balanced in relation to each other if you’ve been syncing
with your cycle. For women who haven’t been practicing
phase-specific self-care, however, hormones levels may
fluctuate wildly and lead to a host of issues, including
these:
Hot flashes and night sweats
Sleep problems
Increased risk for fibroids and endometriosis
PMS
Weight gain
Breast swelling and tenderness
Fertility issues
Forgetfulness
Mood changes
Concentration problems
Headaches
Loss of libido
Vaginal dryness
Urinary incontinence
Decreased sexual response
Lack of energy
Fatigue
Reduced motivation
Changes in hair and pubic hair
Increased susceptibility to urinary and vaginal
infections
Increased risk of osteoporosis
Can I sync with my cycle in perimenopause phase 2?
You can use aspects of the Cycle Syncing Method™, but
you have to allow for the timing to shift. You may need to
spend longer times in various phases depending on what is
happening hormonally and watch out for the desire to
medicate this process away. Look at any perimenopausal
symptoms as an opportunity to check in with yourself and
see if you need to ramp up your self-care.
Lifestyle focus: If you have children, the day-to-day
demands of motherhood gradually begin to ease up as they
become more independent. Think of this as a time when
you can put renewed focus on your relationship with your
partner and your career. You may also find yourself
reevaluating your life goals.
Postmenopause (55-Plus Years Old)
Body focus: Twelve months after your last period, you
will join the estimated two million women per year who
cross the threshold to postmenopause, according to the
North American Menopause Society. If you’re like most
women, you’ll make that transition around fifty-one, the
average age for natural menopause in the US; however, as
you saw earlier, your diet and lifestyle can either delay or
accelerate onset. And as you’ve seen earlier in this book,
the BioCycle Study has found that the longer PMS goes
untreated, the greater the risk for cancer, heart disease,
diabetes, and dementia in postmenopause. It’s clear that
your choices during your adult life and perimenopause
journey will greatly impact your health and well-being
postmenopause. In this phase, FSH has stabilized at its
new, elevated levels, and estrogen, progesterone, and
testosterone have locked into their lower levels for the
long haul. As your hormones stop rising and falling in a
rhythmic monthly pattern, your cyclical nature gives way
to the return of the 24-hour biological clock you had in
childhood. However, just because your second clock is no
longer in the mix, it doesn’t mean your female organs are
useless. In fact, another reason to invest in your hormonal
health while your second clock is still active is that you
could increase the chance of keeping your uterus
postmenopause. Did you know that about one-third of all
women will have a hysterectomy by age sixty? Or that
research shows nearly all of them are unnecessary? When
you were younger, your gynecologist wanted to give you
birth control pills to override your hormonal system, and
when you’re older they say you don’t need a uterus. It’s
the final piece in the trajectory of the thinking that says we
need to medicate and suppress our natural biological
process. But this surgery comes with problems for your
long-term sexual and physical well-being. New research in
2019 has found that the uterus may play a surprising role
in memory, and that having a hysterectomy has been
linked to memory deficits. During this time of life, when
supported, your hormones and brain circuitry are also
rewiring themselves in ways that will open you up to a
new life. I think Christiane Northrup says it best: “The
woman in menopause, who is becoming the queen of
herself, finds herself at a crossroads of life, torn between
the old way she has always known and a new way she has
just begun to dream of . . . imploring her to explore aspects
of herself that have been dormant during her years of
caring for others and focusing on their needs.”
Can I sync with my cycle in postmenopause? Your body
has returned to a 24-hour clock, so you don’t need to live
cyclically for health reasons and hormonal biohacking
purposes, but if you enjoy it you may continue a cyclical
practice. Some women like to stay connected to it by
syncing with the lunar phases. The main focus here,
however, is to consume nutrient-dense foods, proteins, and
essential fatty acids because your body is no longer
making as much in the way of hormones. You can continue
eating the healthful foods listed in the Foods for Your
Cycle chart in chapter 4, but you don’t have to adhere to
the phases. It’s also important to exercise in ways that
strengthen your body without increasing your risk for
injury. And you can schedule your life at a more
sustainable pace even though you’re operating on a single
clock. There is absolutely no reason to mourn the end of
your cyclical life if you took advantage of your infradian
clock while it was active. I feel women who express a
sense of loss at this stage are coming to terms with a
subconscious sadness about not living cyclically while
they could. In fact, if you’ve been following a cyclical
practice, you’ll be accustomed to shifting from one phase
to the next and from one life stage to the next, so you will
embrace this new chapter with open arms.
Lifestyle focus: Look at this stage of your life as an
opportunity to emphasize personal pursuits rather than
taking care of others. More than half of American
postmenopausal women report greater happiness and
fulfillment compared with when they were in their
twenties, thirties, or forties, according to research in the
journal Menopause. Think of menopause as a time to draw
on the wisdom of all the gifts of the cycle all at once.
MORE ON THE MOTHERHOOD LIFE
STAGE
Whenever I’m overwhelmed or feeling guilty that I
haven’t seen my girlfriends in a while, thinking I should be
spending more couple time with my husband, or
contemplating responding to my work email on the
weekend, I remind myself that I’m in the motherhood
stage of my life and also in the early perimenopausal stage
hormonally, and that reminder helps me put things into
perspective. I give myself renewed permission to embrace
the stage I’m in and not to put undue pressure on myself to
do more. There are certain seasons of your life when you
can hang out for hours and hours with your friends, rush
off for romantic weekends with your lover, or spend major
chunks of your free time working on your career, but not
when you’re actively raising small children. Your inner life
clock tells you these things must be reprioritized in
relation to baby. Research confirms what your inner clock
says.
The magazine Child surveyed close to one thousand
moms and dads to gauge how having children affected
their friendships. The results show that women tend to
drift away from their friends after having a child.
Approximately 45 percent said they had fewer friends after
becoming a mom, and they spent less time with them,
down from fourteen hours per week before baby to only
five hours per week. The way we connect with our gal pals
changes too. Instead of lunches, cocktails, or shopping
sprees, we shift to online chatting, email exchanges, or
old-fashioned phone calls—and it’s fulfilling in different
ways.
Becoming a mom can cause a seismic shift in your
romantic relationship, too. Is it any surprise? That tiny
bundle of joy demands every second of your attention,
prevents you from getting enough shut-eye, and just added
137 more things to your to-do list. It’s hard to find time for
yourself, let alone your partner. Decades of research point
to a decline in marital bliss after transitioning to
parenthood. A 2017 study in Current Opinion in
Psychology concluded that the birth of a first child has a
negative effect on the parents’ relationship, whether you’re
an opposite-sex couple or a same-sex couple. And this
isn’t just a post-newlywed slump. In a 2008 study in the
Journal of Family Psychology, researchers measured
marital satisfaction among moms and women without
children over a thirty-nine-month period. All of the women
reported a decline in satisfaction, but the moms registered
a much steeper drop—more than twice the decline that
childless married women reported. When you use the
strategies in chapter 8, you can buck this trend.
When it comes to working after baby, you can find
yourself pulled in two directions. We all want to give 100
percent to our careers, but we also want to give 100
percent to our children. You don’t have to be a math major
to know this doesn’t add up. Because we live in a culture
of perpetual productivity, however, we’re conditioned to
think we must be available at all times to our clients, stay
late to show we’re working hard, and take on extra
projects to prove our worthiness. When you add a baby—
or a second or third baby—into that mix, there just isn’t
enough of you to go around. The biochemical pull to care
for our children is so strong, and the culture of work is
both so unsustainable and unsupportive of maternal needs,
women often feel they must make a hard choice. In fact,
more women are walking out of the workforce and back
into the role of full-time mother. The percentage of women
ages twenty-five to fifty-four in the workforce peaked in
1990 at 74 percent, but has since dropped to 69 percent,
according to a 2014 article in the New York Times. The
percentage of mothers who don’t work outside the home
skyrocketed to 29 percent—representing 10.4 million stay-
at-home moms—in 2012, up from 23 percent in 1999,
according to a Pew Research Center analysis. The Harvard
Business Review analyzed a 2004 survey that looked at
2,443 highly qualified women—those with a professional
degree, graduate degree, or an undergraduate degree with
high honors—and found that 37 percent of them had
chosen to leave the work force at some point. Among
moms, the number jumped to 43 percent. As you might
suspect, family responsibilities rank high on the list of
reasons women are walking out of the workforce.
According to a 2014 New York Times/CBS News/Kaiser
Family Foundation poll of nonworking Americans
between the ages of twenty-five and fifty-four, 61 percent
of women cited family duties as a reason they weren’t
working. It’s clear there is just not adequate flexibility and
support on the corporate level for working moms. Many
women who’ve quit working to be stay-at-home moms say
they feel like failures. Why can’t they “have it all” the way
we’ve been told? Certainly, syncing with your cycle
organizes and amplifies what you can accomplish over the
course of a month, and it decreases the pressure you feel to
accomplish everything in the span of a day. However, I
would love to see more corporations helping women
during the motherhood life stage by being open to these
women creating working hours that are sustainable for
family life. Redefining what success looks like in
motherhood—achieving career goals, being available for
your kids, and having time for self-care—is part of the
biohacking needed in this life stage so you stop trying to
just do more and instead decide to do more of what
matters.
The Cycle Continues: When Your
Daughter Begins Menstruating
If you have a daughter, the most important thing you can do as
a mother is to model your cyclical nature for her. Raising her in
a cyclical environment where she sees you living in harmony
with your hormonal phases imprints this pattern in her so she
will adopt it in her own life. Seeing you change your food, vary
your workouts, and manage your energy according to your
cycle will make this lifestyle seem like second nature to her as
she matures. You might not realize it, but your daughter will
notice the way you approach your life. I see this in my own
daughter, and she’s only four! One evening in my late luteal
phase, I told her I’d been sitting all day at work and needed to
move my body, but I didn’t want to push it too hard. She
watches me work out at home all the time, and she thought
about it for a moment, then said, “What about that workout on
the mat? That would be good.” It was one of those beaming-
with-pride moments for me, and I told her, “You’re absolutely
right. That’s the perfect workout to do right now.” So I did my
thirty-minute mat Pilates workout, and she did the two-minute
warm up with me.
Living a cyclical life is the foundation of the culture in my
home. As I mentioned earlier, my daughter notices that things
shift throughout the month, and she unconsciously observes
shifts for each phase. By the time she hits puberty, she will take
it for granted that she should live in a cyclical way. Hallelujah!
I don’t want her to have to try to wrap her head around this way
of life in a cerebral way, as a concept I’m suggesting for her,
but not doing myself. I would much rather have her tell me,
“Duh, Mom. Leave me alone. How else would I live my life?” If
that happens, I’ll welcome the sass.
Unfortunately, this isn’t the mainstream experience, yet. A
client shared with me a conversation a few of her mom friends
had with their daughters’ pediatrician. The doctor suggested
they put their daughters, who hadn’t started menstruating yet,
on Prozac so the moms wouldn’t have to deal with the girls’
“hormonal” behavior when they hit puberty, and also
recommended that their daughters start taking the pill as soon
as they started their first period. I feel we have to think
extremely carefully about medicating girls whether they have
any symptoms or not. My client said that these moms were also
using the pill to handle their period problems and taking
antidepressants to deal with their own mood issues, and they
very likely thought that medicating their daughters early on
would spare them whatever the moms themselves had gone
through. The fact is, we all deserve so much better with our
hormonal health care at every life stage. Depending on how old
you were when you had your daughter, you may or may not still
be menstruating when she hits puberty. There’s beauty and
wisdom to share in both of these scenarios. If you’re both
cycling, you can do a lot of role modeling for her during the
process. She’ll be discovering her identity, and at midlife you
may be going through a rediscovery of yourself and your
values. It’s a big shift for both parties. You can help guide her
through any turbulence, but remember that her brain is going
through massive shifts, so be as emotionally nonreactive with
her as you can. Mothering and Daughtering by Sil and Eliza
Reynolds is a great resource. Model the self-care practices that
will help her navigate all the life stage transitions throughout
her lifetime. You can also include her on your own transitional
life stage quest. If you enjoy wellness retreats and workshops,
take your teenage daughter with you. Let her explore self-care
practices like dance, yoga, meditation, journaling, or art so she
can become invested in developing her relationship with herself
and her inner world and identify with her biology as the source
of her inner wisdom.
If you’ve already stopped cycling when your daughter
enters her cyclical phase of life, you’ll play more of a support
role. Get in the kitchen with her so you can show her how this
works. You may want to sync with the lunar phases to help you
stay connected to the rhythms of nature and show your teenage
daughter that it’s important to bond with the world around her
and care for it just as she’s caring for her own body.
On a practical level, encourage her to use the MyFLO app,
and have her send you alerts so you’ll know which phase she’s
in. This way you will be able to be aware of the foods she needs
and to help her practice being in tune with her phases so she can
balance school and self-care accordingly. The alerts also help
you as a mother to avoid taking things personally when your
daughter gives you some abrasive energy or attitude. Simply
acknowledge where she’s at in her cycle and help her through
it. Remember, you’re midwifing her through the transition from
a noncyclical being into a cyclical one. Be patient. Be kind. Be
loving. Be supportive. The life-affirming guidance you provide
during this time will lay the foundation for her to be a
hormonally healthy woman with the ability to discern, balance,
and prioritize her values, needs, and responsibilities, which will
lead to lasting happiness and fulfillment. Think of how
wonderful it would have been if you had been given this
wisdom when you were transitioning to becoming a cyclical
being. You could have avoided the path that led you to the
pursuit of perfection, reclaimed your hormonal health, and
enjoyed and taken full advantage of your infradian clock. She’ll
thank you for it . . . some day.
Chapter 10
Dynamic, Wise, and Free
A woman in harmony with her spirit is like a river
flowing. She goes where she will without pretense
and arrives at her destination prepared to be
herself and only herself.
—MAYA ANGELOU
T
hink back to when you were a child—flying high on the
swings, skipping down the street, and racing on your bike with
your hair flying behind you. You barely thought about your
body except to use it to help you do whatever you liked. Then
one day your mom sat you down for the “period curse” talk, or
you squirmed through a disappointing sex ed class like the one
I had, and suddenly everything changed. You discovered what
the world thought about your gender, that your body was a
burden, and you were destined to suffer because of it. And this
discovery broke your heart. It forced you to begin constructing
a new set of beliefs about the body that had served you so well
up until then, and to create a new inner dialogue to address this
heartbreak. You started believing your body would betray you,
so you disconnected from it. You learned to distrust your
biology and its cyclical rhythm and tried to will it into
submission to override its nature. And your body cried out
with symptoms, trying to alert you to a fundamental issue you
were missing. You tried to listen, but your doctor told you
nothing could be done or encouraged you to mask the
symptoms. Meanwhile, the underlying hormonal imbalance
remained, creating a vicious cycle and a self-fulfilling
prophecy. As you’ve seen in this book, the foundational
concept that your body is a burden couldn’t be further from the
scientifically evidenced, biological truth. In fact, the only true
path to healing is through your feminine nature, through your
body, and through integrating your infradian clock. I hope you
feel validated as you have been reading, that your inner
dialogue is affirming, “Yes, this is what I’ve been feeling,”
“I’ve had these instincts but didn’t understand how they were
connected,” “We should have learned all this before,” and
“Yes, it makes sense to go with my own flow.” Your inner
voice and intuition have been calling you home. The Cycle
Syncing Method™ is the bridge back to the body you loved,
the body that made you feel like you could do anything. It’s
time to let the healing begin.
How Did We Get Here?
In workshops, I like to a share the story of how women ended
up where we are today. Before the age of reason, when
Descartes, Newton, and Galileo began exploring the “how” of
things, we lived in an age of spirituality. During this time, all
the activities in a person’s life were connected to a sense of the
sacred and the divine, and people lived their lives according to
a natural order they observed in the world around them and
believed supported the well-being of their soul and spiritual
health. But this spiritual phase eventually gave rise to the age
of reason as a necessary next step to understand the underlying
mechanisms of things, to decode the mysteries that held sway
in the age of spirituality. This new era sought to measure and
delineate the world and everything in it, lending great power to
linear time and specifically to the 24-hour clock. Only things
that could be explained in this new model held value, and
anything that couldn’t be verified scientifically, including
elements in the natural and emotional realm, was deemed
unimportant. And anyone who focused on the natural was
viewed as unthinking or unintelligent. People—read “men”—
steeped in this new linear knowledge and way of reasoning
assumed positions of power and prohibited women from
educating and supporting other women. Eventually, this linear
thinking fueled ideas of increased productivity. If you knew
how things worked, you could outsmart the natural order and
produce as much as you wanted, as fast as you wanted,
whenever you wanted. Those in power realized they could
remake the world in their image and for their benefit.
Of course, it followed suit that women’s wisdom and
cyclical energy were demoted. Midwifery, female-centric
medical practices, and women’s health concerns fell by the
wayside, viewed as mysteries tied to natural laws that escaped
reasoning. Although the age of reason introduced us to the
beauty of science, it ignored women’s biology and then
vilified it because it couldn’t be explained in this linear
fashion. Women were viewed as sick and given diagnoses like
hysteria—derived from the Greek word hysterika, meaning
“uterus”—the alleged cause of our madness. And now,
hundreds of years later, each and every woman’s personal
response to her hormones stems from that inaccuracy. This
book marks the end of this long, painful, and unnecessary
journey by uncovering the one missing piece of the scientific
conversation the age of reason ignored: women have a second
biological clock, and it is equally as valuable as the 24-hour
clock. The 28-day clock can be measured; it is predictable; and
it demands the same respect, attention, and priority as the 24-
hour clock.
Moreover, in perfect lily-gilding fashion, this infradian
clock is the physical embodiment of the sacred energy that
once governed all of life. The 28-day clock reflects the
inherent cyclical timing tied to creation. Women feel it on a
visceral level. The word ritual derives from the Sanskrit word
for menses, rtu. The earliest rituals were tied to women’s
cycles, to lunar and seasonal cycles. But we have been
confronted with a cultural narrative that conditions us to deny
and devalue our cyclical reality. We face this painful story
with every representation of us, with every law governing us,
with every story told about us. It’s enough to drive any woman
nuts and leaves us ungrounded and disconnected not only from
a sense of self, but also from a connection to the sacred. This
spiritual hunger to connect to ourselves and to embody
cyclical timing in our lives explains why women make up the
largest consumer base for personal growth, self-help, spiritual
development, as well as wellness products and programs.
From the beginning of our lives we’re fed a tapeworm—a
combination of misinformation and ignorance about our
biology—that leaves us forever starving, striving to find
something outside of ourselves to satisfy this hunger. We have
been yearning for that elusive something throughout the
centuries of our long oppression. And today, we continue
seeking external things—the nicest house, the coolest
wardrobe, a better figure, a prettier face, workshops, retreats—
in an effort to feel connected to something bigger than
ourselves. In fact, there’s only one thing we need to restore our
power, find our solid ground, and connect to our soul—the
missing knowledge about our cyclical biology and the
permission to follow our intuition through cyclical living.
Reclaiming Your Sovereignty
I needed to walk over the bridge of science to feel confident in
taking on this great experiment in my own life. With so much
water under the historical bridge, I wanted some security in
stepping back into my own rhythm. It can feel a little daunting
to swim against the current if you don’t know that the current
is already with you.
I find links connecting our female biology with nature all
around me. For example, I was awestruck the first time I saw
the Mandelbrot set and understood the way fractal geometry
described perfectly the natural biological world I had fallen in
love with in middle school. You don’t have to be a math whiz
to see the beauty in fractals. Studying the branches of a tree,
the structure of bronchial tubes, or the architecture of the
kidney—I was so impressed that all of organic life was based
on the same self-replicating patterns. Though I’m no
mathematician or physicist, it seems compelling that in our
bodies we have this same fractal effect in our hormonal
patterns, which influence every system in our body. We also
have a quantum effect taking place. Along with the other
fathers of quantum physics—Schrödinger, Bohr, and de
Broglie—Einstein pushed us past Newtonian physics, past the
traditional science that declared our universe was nothing
more than an assembly of physical material. Quantum physics
showed us that, in fact, nothing in this world is actually solid
material, and everything is energy. In quantum mechanics,
there’s a wondrous effect in which particles can appear to be in
two states at once. Our female biochemistry similarly allows
us to access two different time patterns—the 24-hour and 28-
day rhythms. Surely this combination of the fractal and
quantum effects—found uniquely in the female body—is at
the heart of the most powerful forces of nature in existence.
I’ve always been fascinated about how women were living
before Euclidean geometry turned the focus to the man-made
environment where everything was linear and Newtonian
physics made everything finite. Scientists assumed everything
in nature was chaotic and unpredictable and could not be
described mathematically. They were wrong. Benoit
Mandelbrot, an IBM researcher, figured it out in the 1970s. He
understood that complexity doesn’t mean chaos. Nature is
genius, elegant, and efficient, just like you. I can only imagine
what that pre-Euclidean life would have looked like—living
closely in tune with the natural world, performing cyclical
rituals, feeling more free. I wanted to find a way to create that
life I imagined within our modern world, so I could live as an
empowered and embodied woman. The cyclical pattern gave
me a vision of how I could do that—and how any woman
living anywhere could do it—without having to run away to
the forest or give up technology. The past and how we might
have lived in it centuries ago will always remain up for debate,
but looking at ourselves through the lens of current science—
seeing how our biology reflects the tides, the patterns of the
moon, the rotation of a wheel—we no longer have to
daydream about the past. We can simply stand in our own
skin, emboldened by the forces of nature that power life within
us and all around us. Ignoring the power of this biological
process is just as limiting as the linear world was before
allowing for nature to reveal itself. We simply must reject the
conditioning we have received about these so-called hormonal
limitations and embrace what we are—fractals of the cosmos,
quantum beings, stardust made flesh—and shine a light on a
new version of reality that does us and humanity justice.
Even though this new way of living involves connecting
deeply with your biology, the science of your cycle doesn’t
mean your hormones rule your life. By acknowledging the
simultaneous existence of your two clocks and syncing with
your second clock, you’re going beyond reductive materialist
science (the notion that the brain creates consciousness) and
biological determinism (the idea that you have no free will).
You’re not just the by-product of your body’s hormonal
mandate. With greater awareness, you can be tuned in to those
hormones and bend them to your will for your benefit. If you
were just a bag of biochemicals, you would have no ability to
tweak your hormonal status—but as you’ve seen throughout
this book, you have the power to heal your hormones and
upgrade your well-being.
This is a beautiful opportunity for science and spirituality
to converge and enhance our consciousness and self-
awareness. So many forms of spirituality suggest we must
transcend the body to connect to something bigger than
ourselves. But what I’ve found personally is that for women, it
is through the body that we come to this greater perspective
and deeper conscious awareness. I’m not the first woman to
try to show other women the way home to ourselves, to our
feminine nature, to our connection to the divine. Jungian
analyst Clarissa Pinkola Estés wrote one of the most seminal
female empowerment books, Women Who Run With the
Wolves, back in 1992. Marion Woodman and so many others
have also shared the idea that reclaiming our inner wisdom is
the key to fulfillment. I had the privilege of seeing Hilma af
Klint’s work at the Guggenheim Museum during its exhibition.
Here was a woman during the suffragist movement of the early
1900s who was looking for validation of her intrinsic value in
the midst of a society that marginalized women. She painted
incredible representations of the intersection of the science of
life and the geometry of the sacred to show that we are all
truly equal. It was like getting a hug from a friend in the past,
and it felt like no time had passed at all.
What I’ve gleaned from nearly twenty years of helping
women balance their hormones and tap into the power of their
feminine energy is that through healing the body we become
whole. When you connect to this larger creative force of
nature by going within your own body, syncing with your
cycle becomes the physical daily practice that keeps you
anchored from floating out into external distractions that are
unfulfilling. You settle into a sense of greater self-awareness
and realize that everything you’re seeking is already within
you. Nothing is missing; nothing is wrong. You are perfect in
your ever-changing nature, just the way you are.
This understanding gives us an opportunity to reclaim our
sovereignty, allowing us to recognize our true nature as
powerful agents of change. And our ability to amplify this
energy, by staying deeply connected to our biology, lets us
focus on any aspect of our lives and create whatever change is
needed—within ourselves, within our relationships, and within
the world. By deeply investigating the how of our inner
mechanics, we discover that we are not lesser, that we are not
designed to be dominated, that our bodies are a gift that keeps
the timing for a rhythm that is beneficial for all. Our
perspective adds much-needed medicine to our unbalanced
culture. And as we balance our hormones and get into
harmony with our FLO, we can bring balance and harmony to
the world around us.
Reimagining the Hero’s Journey
Joseph Campbell outlined the concept of the hero’s journey in
his classic work The Power of Myth. Essentially, this journey
involves an unlikely hero who receives the call to undertake an
epic journey. He ventures out on a quest, makes progress,
withstands setbacks, and ultimately achieves the goal, the
grail, and/or the girl. It’s about the conquest—doing something
so you can get something—and this glorified tale has endured
throughout the millennia.
Take a moment to consider how much the myth of the
hero’s journey has trickled down and seeped into your
conscious and subconscious mind, dictating what you view as
heroic, valuable, worthy, and laudable. In the telling and
perpetuating of these stories, we’re basically saying that the
masculine energy of adventure, pursuit, and conquest is what
society has been built on and what deserves to be valued.
Then notice that there are no stories in which a female hero
is portrayed. That’s why we struggle so much with our cyclical
nature. We glorify the doing, and we’re still very wary of the
not doing.
A side effect of not having our stories told and represented
is that we actually lack vocabulary to describe our reality.
Here’s what I’ve experienced in the female version of the
hero’s journey. There is the call—but it’s not for a grail or a
goal; it’s from the body or the heart, and it’s a quest to come
home to yourself. Then there is the journey within, into the
unseen places of your psyche to access your wild, feminine
nature and bring that to the light. Then there is the
reclamation, which is the journey of the cycle—going through
the phases to reclaim an appropriate balance of your masculine
and feminine energy. Finally there is the rebirth.
You get to experience this every month. You get to go
within to rest and incubate to make sure you have all that you
need. And from that place of fullness, you can bring yourself
out into the light. The deeper within you go, the farther you
can launch forward when it is the time to do so in the first half
of the cycle. You get to reinvent yourself every month. What
an incredible gift.
The ordinary becomes extraordinary because you have this
deeper self-awareness. Every little thing can become an
opportunity for you to grow, learn more about yourself, and
live more from a place of compassionate listening and
compassionate responding.
It’s Okay to Get Emotional
When I share this information in workshops, there is a
palpable emotional process that takes place in the room. It’s
hard to describe, but it feels like the women in attendance go
through several experiences. First, there’s validation and
excitement as the light flicks on and all the dots are connected.
Then there’s anger in recognizing what they have missed out
on in their personal lives due to this misunderstanding. Then
there’s sadness at what can’t be reclaimed. Ultimately, there’s
joy and elation that what they hoped for all along, what they
dared to believe in quiet brief moments, is true—that they are
worthy, powerful, equal, and capable leaders. This realization
is emotional for them. It’s emotional for me. And reading this
book may be emotional for you, too.
WHAT YOU MIGHT FEEL
I talk with women on a daily basis who are confronted
with very strong, conflicting emotions about this
revelation.
Martina, a thirty-four-year-old marketing executive,
felt a tremendous amount of grief when she learned
how syncing with her cyclical nature was the solution
to her period problems and the path to greater
happiness and fulfillment at work, in love, and as a
mother. She felt like she had wasted twenty years of
her life suffering needlessly from hormonal
imbalance, and that her symptoms had contributed to
the breakup of her marriage and her decision to take
another career path. She mourned the life she could
have had and should have had.
Robin, a twenty-one-year-old student at an Ivy
League university, was furious. She couldn’t believe
that in all her years as a student at the nation’s finest
schools, not one professor, not one counselor, not one
school nurse had ever told her the truth about her
biochemistry. Spurred to take action to ensure the
spread of misinformation wouldn’t continue to the
next generation, Robin started her own version of a
Period Club—now there’s a girl after my own heart!
—at her sorority and made each member vow to give
any younger female siblings or cousins the real sex ed
talk.
Sarah, in her late thirties, felt the big difference for
her was emotional. Before she’d always considered
herself a quitter, but then she started to realize there
are certain times of the month when she’s really
excited about trying new things and then there are
other times when she really needs to just rest. She
knows now that things that were really exciting
before might not resonate right now, but if she just
waits for the next phase, her excitement will come
back. She also feels compassion for all the other
women in her life—her mother, her friends, her
grandmother—who put so much pressure on
themselves to be perfect, and didn’t know they could
have lifted this weight off themselves if they had just
connected with their cycles.
Waking up to the truth of who you are may place you on a
roller coaster of emotions. Give yourself time to digest these
insights, and start making changes slowly in your own life.
Don’t feel like you have to tackle these cultural wrongs on a
societal level, leading the charge to change our sexual
education system, institutional bias, or health care gaps. Start
with yourself, and heal your hormones so you can feel better
and live the best life you possibly can. My wish is for you to
finally get off this hamster wheel of oppression—the one that
has you running in circles trying to be perfect, pretty, thin,
compliant, and docile; the one that values conformity. My
wish is for women to bask in this corrected self-awareness,
stand tall, throw off this yoke entirely, and walk together
toward a new future. I can’t fully envision what this future will
bring, but my heart beats with joy at the thought of what we
can create.
No Perfection Required
As we march forward into this new future, we need to make
sure we don’t simply take the same unhealthy approaches to
productivity and apply them to this cyclical way of living.
Don’t think of syncing with your cycle as something you have
to add to your to-do list in your quest for perfection. I
understand that in our patriarchal environment, it’s almost
impossible to avoid being infected with the illness of
perfectionism. As young girls, when we hit puberty, we’re
struck with myths about our bodies and faced with the
challenge of figuring out how to survive the patriarchy. On a
meta level, the way our society values women is tangled up in
how perfect you are—perfect in looks, moods, performance,
and everything else. A by-product of the intergenerational
patriarchal wounding we have inherited, perfectionism is
something we use as a survival response. It’s how we
unconsciously seek out safety and security. It’s how we gain
value from our peers and approval from our community.
Mostly, it’s the ticket to landing a man, which in our
heteronormative society has long been viewed as the key to
safety. The more perfect you are, the more successful the mate
you can attract, and the better they’ll be able to provide you
with the economic and physical security you crave. This tired,
old-school notion no longer has relevance today, because
women can do it ourselves—provide for ourselves, gain
economic independence, and install an alarm system for safety
if we need to. So why do we still hold tight to this harmful
story? It doesn’t stand up. It doesn’t hold water. It disintegrates
in the light. Before you realize how faulty it is, however, this
script screws up your relationship with your body. And
unfortunately, this story can prevent you from gaining the
benefits of engaging your cyclical clock. I see this far too
often. In almost twenty years of working with clients one-on-
one, I’ve never met a woman who hasn’t had this
psychopathology of perfectionism get in the way of a healthy
relationship with her body. There are two sides to the
perfectionism coin: procrastination and micromanagement.
Procrastination: If you find yourself thinking, “I’m not
going to start taking care of myself by syncing with my
cycle yet because I can’t follow the entire program the
way I want to,” you may be falling victim to the
procrastination side of the perfectionism coin. When you
know you can’t give something your 100 percent effort,
you may not bother trying at all. What’s really a shame is
that if you gave 50 percent of your utmost effort, or even
20 percent, you could still gain some benefit, but you’re
missing out on all that because you don’t want to be
judged for not doing enough. Sometimes the judges are
outside of you—teachers, bosses, or coworkers—but
more often your harshest critic is the one you see in the
mirror. You don’t want to let yourself down by not being
perfect, so you don’t even start.
Micromanagement: If you’re syncing with your cycle
but micromanaging it with thoughts like, “Am I eating
the right food today? Did I do the wrong exercise for this
phase? Oh no, I planned my big presentation for the
wrong phase!” you can drive yourself crazy. Eventually,
this micromanagement adds to your stress, so you give up
and assume it’s too hard because you couldn’t live up to
your own expectations.
How can anyone survive in a mental ecosystem like this?
It’s so stressful and exhausting to be caught up in this dance of
procrastination or micromanagement. More important, how do
you unhook yourself from the perfectionist trap? Take it from
me, a recovering perfectionist—you can do it. I use the phrase
“recovering,” because perfectionism is never really cured. You
have to be vigilant each and every day to break free from the
chains of perfectionism. I used to be a massive procrastinator,
which is ironic considering how much I do now on a daily
basis. I’m a testament to breaking out of this trap. When I
developed the Cycle Syncing Method™ to heal my hormonal
issues, I began confronting the scripted thoughts in my brain at
every turn. You don’t have to be negative toward these
thoughts. You just need to be objective and ask yourself, “Do I
need this behavior to survive or feel safe?” “How is this
thought serving me?” “Is it serving me to delay starting to
sync with my second clock?” “Is it serving me to get so
wrapped up in the minute details of this process that I miss out
on the joy it’s supposed to bring?” When you answer honestly,
you may recognize that you’re in perfectionist survival mode,
which feels stressful. The Cycle Syncing Method™ is designed
to help you break free from this pattern so you can thrive, not
just survive.
The real genius of cyclical living is you don’t have to do it
perfectly. Yes, this book gives you charts to help you find
foods, exercises, and planning tools to optimize your
hormones, biological systems, and creativity, but following
your instincts is your goal. Flexibility is baked into the
method. I want you to do this program intuitively. That’s a
loaded word we’ve been conditioned to mistrust, but I mean it
from a biochemical perspective: the right and left hemispheres
of your brain cross-communicate about facts and feelings to
inform you about your body’s needs. This process also gives
you access to a conscious awareness that transcends your
body. You just know or feel what’s right for you in the
moment. If you’re in your ovulatory phase, which generally
calls for cooling foods, but you’re exhausted from a tough
work week and feel like you need a bowl of hot soup, go
ahead and have the soup. That intuitive sense that you need
something warm is coming from a wise, powerful, and
conscious place. Listen to your self. Let this new cyclical
practice be the bridge that connects you to your intuition, so
you can respond dynamically to your body’s needs. Trust
yourself.
You can also give yourself permission to start syncing with
your cycle by simply dipping your toe in the water and
changing one thing, whether it’s food, exercise, scheduling, or
focusing on one specific phase. Wherever you start, celebrate
and enjoy it, and build from there. I’ve been syncing with my
cycle for almost two decades, and I keep learning and going
deeper with my practice of living as an embodied woman.
From your first baby steps it becomes an upward spiral of
learning, appreciation, self-awareness, and growth. That’s
what I want you to have. If you’re currently stuck in 24-hour
clock perfection mode, just focus on unraveling your to-do list
and stretching it into your second clock, the 28-day clock.
You’ll be less busy and will have more space to listen to your
body, to tap into your intuition, and to respond with what’s
right for you. Syncing with your cycle should be fun for you,
not stressful. It should be a joy for you to develop this kind of
loving relationship with yourself and your body.
TELL YOUR INNER VOICE TO BE KIND!
Realizing that most of what you believe about yourself
and your body has been based on misinformation is a
real eye-opener. All of a sudden, you begin to see there
is no truth in all those nasty things you have been
telling yourself. The things you mistook for character
flaws or imperfections are actually part of your
strengths. And once you realize scientific evidence
shows negative thinking can alter your genetic
expression in a harmful way, while positive thoughts
can enhance your DNA and genes, it becomes even
more critical for you to reexamine your inner dialog.
Instead of berating yourself for what you thought were
personal failures, look for the biological root causes
and attend to them. Here’s a look at the conversations
you should be having with yourself.
Old Inner New Inner Dialog
Dialog
I can’t stick with When I switch hormonal phases, my
a diet. I have no metabolism changes and I have different
willpower. caloric needs.
I’m a failure In the second half of my cycle, my body
because heightens my stress response and releases
sometimes I can’t more cortisol. I can practice targeted self-
handle the stress care to counteract this.
at work.
I always feel so Maybe I have a hormonal imbalance that
anxious. I’m a triggers certain neurotransmitters in my
weak person. brain, or my body is lacking in omega-3
fatty acids.
I suck because Maybe I’m just using the wrong clock
I’m terrible at and need to schedule things to work
following better with my body’s natural rhythms.
through on
things.
A CHAIN OF COURAGE AND LOVE
Although the revelations in this book about your
hormones and biological systems may be new to you,
the notion that women are powerful biological
creatures has deep roots. Books by other women have
been the beacons of light for me on the path of self-
remembering. I remember when I was in middle school
reading about menstrual rites of Native American
women in Carolyn Niethammer’s book Daughters of
the Earth and feeling a longing for something I
couldn’t name. The Joy of Sex changed my world view,
as did Woman: An Intimate Geography, by Natalie
Angier. A friend gave me Sharron Rose’s book, The
Path of the Priestess, which inspires women to get in
touch with their powerful inner goddess energy, and
gave me insight into a language I didn’t even know
existed. Then Eve Ensler published The Vagina
Monologues. Christiane Northrup’s Women’s Bodies,
Women’s Wisdom validated our physical suffering.
Most recently, Madeline Miller’s Circe was the first
fiction book I’ve read describing the hero’s journey
from a female’s point of view. Each of these books
read like a love note, encouraged me, validated me,
nurtured me, brought me home to myself. These
authors’ courage in writing in historically
unprecedented ways makes me believe change is not
only possible, but inevitable. Authors like Miranda
Gray (The Optimized Woman) and Alexandra Pope and
Sjanie Hugo Wurlitzer (Wild Power), who share that
the journey to enhancing our health, creativity, and
spirituality lies in our menstrual cycle, are allied voices
in the growing chorus of women seeking to get in
touch with our cyclical side.
Is It Time for a Matriarchy?
Many of the women who have healed their period problems by
syncing with their cycle ask me whether I think the next
logical step in the feminist movement is the establishment of a
matriarchal society to replace the oppressive patriarchy. Most
of them look a little surprised when I tell them we’ve already
had matriarchal societies. Archaeologist and anthropologist
Dr. Marija Gimbutas described a goddess- and woman-
centered culture from the Paleolithic era as far back as two
million years ago, which was replaced by a patriarchy only
about five thousand years ago. Based on her archaeological
findings, she suggested the gynocentric culture was a peaceful
one that revered the feminine nature and believed in economic
parity. Doesn’t that sound nice? Could it be true that women
thousands of years ago enjoyed economic equality, while
women in the US today still earn a paltry 82 cents for every
dollar men make? The conversation about our matriarchal
heritage doesn’t get much attention, and in fact some dismiss
or question the idea, as Cynthia Eller, a professor of religious
studies, did in her book The Myth of Matriarchal Prehistory.
But don’t give up on the idea of matriarchal ancestors too
fast. Emerging research on genetics points to something
bizarre that happened about five to seven thousand years ago.
A 2015 study in Genome Research unearthed evidence that the
population of reproducing men throughout Europe, Africa, and
Asia took a dramatic nosedive. Researchers discovered a
bottleneck in the Y chromosome, which is passed from father
to son, causing the collapse of genetic diversity among males.
What caused this mysterious drop-off? New research in a 2018
issue of Nature Communications claims the most likely
scenario was war between patrilineal clans. Stone Age men
were so vicious they were clubbing one another to death and
decimating entire male lineages. This left behind a majority
population of women—about seventeen women for every
man. I think it’s only logical to assume that while the men
were off killing one another, the women must have been
constructing cultures at home. I can imagine them creating a
society steeped in female-centered values that catered to their
biological reality.
I don’t understand why some people find it so hard to
believe we could have had a gynocentric prehistoric society. In
fact, there are matriarchal cultures still in existence today. Just
look at the Mosuo society in rural China. A beautiful 2012
documentary on PBS’s Frontline called The Women’s Kingdom
explored this fascinating society’s culture. The women there
don’t marry in the traditional sense. They practice what’s
called a “walking marriage” in which male suitors enter a
woman’s bedroom hoping to enjoy a “sweet night,” and she
holds the power to decide whether or not she wants him to stay
for sex—no strings attached. After doing the deed, the man
has to hit the road the following morning. A Mosuo woman
can enjoy a walking marriage with more than one man if she
wishes without any of the shame that American women
sometimes feel about sex. In this way of life, lovers don’t live
under the same roof, and fathers aren’t involved in raising
their children. It’s the mother and the mother’s family who
take charge of child-rearing, and it’s the mother’s name that is
passed down to the children. In the all-important matrilineal
family unit, relatives choose the most capable woman to be in
charge of the household. For me, one of the most touching
scenes in the documentary was watching a young girl talk
about how proud she was to be female, saying, “I enjoy being
a girl. Girls can do everything. Isn’t that great?” Yes, that is
great! And true!
After reading this book and understanding all the gifts your
cyclical nature can offer you when your hormones are healthy
and balanced, you might feel like banging the drum to
overthrow our patriarchal society and replace it with a
matriarchy. But we don’t want a society where one biological
clock dominates the other. In her essay “There Is No Hierarchy
of Oppressions,” feminist poet Audre Lorde wrote, “I have
learned that oppression and the intolerance of difference come
in all shapes and sizes and colors and sexualities; and that
among those of us who share the goals of liberation and a
workable future for our children, there can be no hierarchies of
oppression.” We need to envision a more inclusive future that
honors our cyclical nature so we can optimize our physical,
emotional, and social well-being while supporting inclusion,
sustainability, and healing. You deserve to have truthful
information about your body and its amazing gifts, and we all
deserve a future that embraces our right to live according to
our true nature.
Charting the Path Ahead
How will our feminine power evolve in the future? Now that
we’re aware of our infradian clock, we have an opportunity to
spread that knowledge and expand on what we know. As you
saw in chapter 1, women are woefully underrepresented in
health research, and this is especially true of females of
reproductive age. A 2014 report on sex-specific research from
Brigham and Women’s Hospital got it right: “Medical research
that is either sex- or gender-neutral or skewed to male
physiology puts women at risk for missed opportunities for
prevention, incorrect diagnoses, misinformed treatments,
sickness, and even death.” It’s time for researchers to stop
assuming that findings from studies on men and
postmenopausal women translate to menstruating women. In
the past, scientists pointed to the potential risks to women of
childbearing age and their future fetuses as reasons for
excluding them from research studies. Scientists may have
finally found a way around this roadblock. In a 2017 report in
Nature Communications, researchers revealed they had
succeeded in integrating cells from every organ involved in the
menstrual cycle—ovaries, fallopian tubes, uterus, cervix—in a
petri dish. This gives health researchers an easier, risk-free
way to study women’s cycles. For now, researchers are
planning to use the system to study hormonal contraceptives
and their effects on female biochemistry, and they also hope to
look into the hormonal cycle’s impact on the gastrointestinal
tract and conditions like Crohn’s disease and inflammatory
bowel disease. This is a great start, but I can’t help thinking of
all the women-centered research we might be able to access
thanks to this laboratory version of your cycle. I can’t wait for
researchers to take a deeper dive on the following:
How nutrition impacts each phase of a woman’s cycle
How nutrition can ease symptoms of disease in women
How fitness routines affect each phase of a woman’s
cycle
How a cyclical fitness approach affects a woman’s
biochemistry
How low-carb diets affect women’s biochemistry and
phases
How vegetarian and vegan diets affect women’s
biochemistry and phases
How intermittent fasting affects women’s biochemistry
and phases
How a cyclical eating plan affects women’s biochemistry
and phases
How women can best achieve autophagy (an anti-aging
process that involves cleaning up damaged cells) in their
reproductive years
How women metabolize prescription drugs in each cycle
phase
How hormonal birth control given to teenage girls affects
their mental health and future fertility
Thinking about everything we could learn about our
biochemistry from this research makes me excited about our
future and hopeful the day is coming when women won’t ever
again question our cyclical nature and won’t dream of ignoring
it or trying to mask it to fit into our male-patterned society.
The more we know, the more we’ll understand that biohacking
our diets, exercise, and schedules with our monthly cycle is
the only way to live that makes sense for women. And we
need to make sure the biohacking world helps women
understand they need to biohack for their own biological
reality to reap the benefits of this practice.
It isn’t just the medical field that needs to be more
inclusive. The future of our work environments is also at
stake. I was invited to speak on a panel about artificial
intelligence (AI). What on earth was a hormonal health expert
like me doing talking about AI, you ask? I’m the first to admit
I’m not much of a techie, but I do want to make sure AI is
developed with the female biochemical reality in mind. Did
you know AI is largely based on male patterns? Or that
developers may unconsciously be infusing it with gender
biases? Or that AI could amplify existing gender inequality?
Here’s proof: Google’s online advertising algorithm displays
ads for high-paying C-suite jobs to more men than women,
according to a 2015 study in Proceedings on Privacy
Enhancing Technologies. This same study found that AI
trained to process text determined that “man is to computer
programmer as woman is to homemaker.” And eye-opening
research presented at the 2017 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing in Copenhagen,
Denmark, found that image-recognition software ramped up
sexist stereotypes. For example, looking up the word
“cooking” in two popular stock image collections turned up 33
percent more pictures involving women than men. No
surprise, right? When the researchers used machine learning to
train the software, however, that percentage jumped to 68
percent. Machine learning magnified the existing bias! Can
you imagine a world where machines reinforce sexism? We
can’t let that happen. Fortunately, this research team sought to
reverse this unexpected trend and implemented a series of
controls that effectively reduced the bias. That’s the kind of AI
development we want. Even more pressing is the need for
more women in leadership roles in the creation of AI. In the
AI and machine-learning arena, women make up as few as 18
percent of C-level executives, according to an analysis by
TechEmergence. How can we expect a field that is more than
80 percent male-dominated to accurately reflect women’s
needs when creating algorithms, chatbots, and other forms of
artificial intelligence that will fundamentally shape the future
of the workplace and the world?
A Feminine Force of Nature
Once you start living in sync with your cyclical nature and
according to your unique female biological rhythms, you’ll
unleash the superpower of your hormones. You’ll minimize
bothersome symptoms; boost your biological systems;
enhance your long-term health; and gain access to greater
creativity, more effortless productivity, deeper fulfillment, and
greater self awareness. Do it for yourself, do it for your health,
do it for your happiness. But remember, getting hormonally
healthy isn’t the ultimate goal; it’s just the jumping-off point
for a whole new life. In part 2 of this book you discovered
how the Cycle Syncing Method™ can be applied to yourself to
heal your hormones, improve your biological systems, and
boost your overall well-being. In part 3 you saw how to build
on your increased health, energy, and vitality to unleash your
creativity at work, enhance your orgasms and relationships,
and be a better mom without all the stress. Once all these areas
of your life are firing on all cylinders, thanks to your new
cyclical practice, you can begin to look outside yourself and
see how you can be an agent of change in the world around
you. With your new ability to continually increase your energy
physically and emotionally, you can share your talents with the
world and become a force of nature for good, which is what
women are hardwired to do—to create out of the fertile void,
to tend and befriend, and to lead like a woman.
So many women feel stuck and are looking for someone to
tell them how to bring forth their creative talents. But as you
now realize, you have an inner guidance mechanism that
shows you the way and will lead you to give birth to your true
self. Now that you are no longer in the dark about who you
are, and you’ve freed up all of your extra inner energy from
being on that hamster wheel of failed diets, failed workouts,
and failed time management, what will you do with your one
wild and precious life? Now that your head is no longer filled
with that inner critical voice berating you for your alleged lack
of willpower, self-control, and motivation, how can you
harness your brainpower to take advantage of your unique
talents? Who would you be if you weren’t somebody who was
always dealing with symptoms? How would you use your
body to master your environment rather than working on your
body as a never-ending project? What can you do to become a
force of nature?
A Radical New Life
What you have learned in this book shouldn’t feel like the next
wellness trend or the next fad diet. The information here
should feel like a radical departure from anything you have
ever read, and it is. Syncing with your cycle brings you home
to yourself. You no longer need to be critical of yourself,
doubt yourself, or chase some idealized notion of static
perfection. You can finally tune in to your body and listen to
your natural rhythms so you can blossom in a dynamic,
responsive, and compassionate way. With science on your
side, you can have confidence to live the way that makes you
feel good. You can go after all of your dreams and ambitions
in a way that builds your energy, sustains your health, and
decreases your stress. You can let go of being perfect and
trying to be the same every day. There’s nothing more
beautiful or more powerful than a courageous, dynamic
woman. Adopting this cyclical practice is a radical new way of
thinking about your body and living your life that lets you
celebrate being you. In revolutionizing your life, you will
revolutionize the world. On your own time.
Meal Plans
Follicular Phase
Breakfast: Overnight Oats with Cashews, Goji Berries, and
Cinnamon
Lunch: Lentil Tomato Quinoa Pilaf
Dinner: Chicken Veggie Buddha Bowl
Ovulatory Phase
Breakfast: Sweet Green Protein Smoothie
Lunch: Hearty Greens Salad with Salmon Toasts
Dinner: Zoodles with Pumpkin Seed Pesto
Luteal Phase
Breakfast: Avocado Tater-Toast
Lunch: Turkey Tacos (with Vegetarian Option)
Dinner: Chickpea Pasta with Garlic Kale
Menstrual Phase
Breakfast: PBJ Bowl
Lunch: Bento Salmon Soba Miso Lunch
Dinner: Bunless Bison Burgers with the Works
Recipes
Follicular Phase
Overnight Oats with Cashews, Goji Berries,
and Cinnamon
Serves 1
¼ cup organic steel-cut oats
¾ cup water or unsweetened almond milk
Small handful cashews
Small handful goji berries
Dash of ground cinnamon
Dash of sea salt
1 teaspoon apple cider vinegar
Combine all ingredients in a bowl and cover. Place in
refrigerator and let soak overnight. In the morning, transfer to
a pot and cook on medium heat until heated through.
Lentil Tomato Quinoa Pilaf
Serves 2 or 3
1 cup quinoa
2 cups water
1 cup cooked lentils, canned or fresh
1 large tomato, chopped
Small handful fresh basil
Romaine lettuce (or greens of your choice)
Honey mustard dressing, organic
Cook quinoa in water according to package directions.
Combine the quinoa, cooked or canned lentils, chopped
tomato, and basil. In a separate bowl, toss the greens with
honey mustard dressing. Divide the greens, top each serving
with about ¾ cup of the quinoa mixture, and serve.
Chicken Veggie Buddha Bowl
Serves 2
2 boneless skinless organic chicken breasts
Coarse sea salt to taste
Freshly ground black pepper to taste
Fresh or dried thyme to taste
2 tablespoons extra virgin olive oil
4 carrots, peeled and sliced into ¼-inch rounds
1 cup of string beans, ends trimmed and cut into 1-inch pieces
1 head of broccoli, sliced into stems and florets
2 bunches baby bok choy
Black beans (optional)
For the dressing
¼ cup tahini paste
¼ cup olive oil
Juice from 2 lemons
2 teaspoons honey
Sea salt and pepper to taste
To poach the chicken: Fill a large skillet with about ½ inch of
water. Bring to a boil over high heat. Add chicken, salt, and
herbs, and let simmer. After 10 minutes, remove skillet from
heat and cover. Let stand for about 15 minutes, turning
chicken over halfway through, until the chicken is thoroughly
cooked. Drain poaching liquid.
To steam the veggies: In a pot, layer carrots, then broccoli,
then string beans, and bok choy on top. Add water to fill the
pot to a level just below the broccoli. Sprinkle with salt. Steam
for 15 minutes, or until broccoli is tender when tested with a
fork.
For the dressing: Combine the ingredients in a food processor.
Start with half the lemon juice, and add more as needed to
your taste. Mix until well blended.
Arrange veggies in a large bowl, and add the black beans if
you will be using them. Top with the sliced poached chicken,
and drizzle with 2 to 3 tablespoons dressing.
Ovulatory Phase
Sweet Green Protein Smoothie
Serves 1
1 cup unsweetened almond milk
2 cups mixed baby greens
1 tablespoon chia seeds
1 tablespoon hemp seeds
1 tablespoon ground flaxseeds
1 date, pitted
1 tablespoon almond butter
¼ teaspoon vanilla extract
Combine all ingredients in a blender, and blend until smooth.
Pour into a glass and enjoy.
Hearty Greens Salad with Salmon Toasts
Serves 2
For the salad
2 cups baby spinach
1 cup escarole, chopped
1 small fennel bulb, thinly sliced
¼ cup fresh parsley, chopped
For the dressing
½ cup extra virgin olive oil
½ lemon, juiced
1 tablespoon Dijon mustard
1 teaspoon honey
2 tablespoons fresh tarragon, chopped
1 clove garlic, minced
Coarse sea salt to taste
Freshly ground black pepper to taste
For the salmon and toasts
1 can wild salmon, drained
1 to 2 tablespoons Dijon mustard
Gluten-free or sprouted grain bread of your choice
Combine salad ingredients in a large bowl. Combine dressing
ingredients in a mason jar, and shake until combined. Pour
desired amount of dressing onto salad and toss well. Drain the
can of salmon. In a small bowl, mix the salmon with Dijon
mustard. Toast your bread, and then spread the salmon on it.
Serve with salad and enjoy!
Zoodles with Pumpkin Seed Pesto
Serves 2
For the zoodles
3 zucchini, spiralized or julienned
Sea salt to taste
Olive oil for sautéing
For the pesto
1 garlic clove
2 cups fresh basil leaves (or use a combination of basil, spinach,
and/or arugula)
½ cup raw pumpkin seeds
⅓ cup olive oil
1 lemon, juiced
Salt to taste
For the protein
Your choice of grilled chicken or fish, or white beans
Blend all the pesto ingredients in a food processor. In a large
sauté pan, heat some olive oil and lightly sauté the zucchini
noodles. Toss together the noodles and pesto. Add the protein
of your choice on top, then serve.
Luteal Phase
Avocado Tater-Toast
Serves 1
1 sweet potato, sliced lengthwise
½ avocado
2 eggs
Butter or coconut oil for frying
Juice of ½ lime or lemon
Turmeric to taste
Coarse sea salt to taste
Freshly ground black pepper to taste
Preheat oven to 350°. Place the sweet potato slices on a sheet
pan, and bake them for 20 minutes. (Reserve the unused slices
for a snack or another day’s breakfast; they can easily be
heated up in a pan.)
In a frying pan, heat the butter or oil, and prepare eggs over
easy by frying them on both sides until the white is cooked
through but the yolk is still runny. Sprinkle some turmeric,
salt, and pepper onto the eggs while cooking.
Mash the meat of the avocado with the lime juice. Spread the
mashed avocado on the warm sweet potato slices, season with
sea salt and black pepper to taste, and serve with eggs on top.
Turkey Tacos (With Vegetarian Option)
Serves 2
½ pound ground turkey or ½ head cauliflower
Salt and freshly ground pepper to taste
½ cup parsnip, cubed
1 teaspoon olive oil
1 teaspoon chili powder, or hot sauce or spice of your choice
½ cup cooked brown basmati rice
½ cup black beans
1 tablespoon shaved radish
4 small gluten-free corn tortillas
½ cup chopped tomatoes
Cilantro for garnish
½ lime, wedged
If you are using ground turkey, heat the oil in a pan. Season
the ground turkey with salt and pepper, and sauté on medium
heat until fully cooked. Set aside. If you are using cauliflower
for the vegetarian option, roast the cauliflower with the
parsnip in the next step.
Preheat the oven to 400°. Peel, cube, and toss the parsnip with
olive oil, salt, and pepper. Place on a sheet pan and roast until
tender, about 40 minutes or so. Set aside. If you are preparing
a vegetarian recipe, break the cauliflower into florets; toss
with olive oil, salt, pepper, and chili powder or your favorite
hot sauce or other spice; and roast at the same temperature and
at the same time as the parsnip, until tender. Set aside.
Shave the radish with a grater or mandolin. Warm the tacos in
a pan.
Assemble tacos with rice and beans on bottom, then add
ground turkey or cauliflower and the rest of the toppings.
Garnish with cilantro and a squeeze of fresh lime.
Chickpea Pasta with Garlic Kale
Serves 2 or 3
1 box chickpea pasta (spirals or ziti shape)
1 head lacinato kale
Olive oil for sautéing
2 or 3 garlic cloves, peeled and finely chopped
Salt and pepper to taste
½ cup water
½ cup chopped raw walnuts
Bring a large pot of salted water to a boil, and then add
chickpea pasta and cook for approximately 7 minutes or
according to package directions. Drain and toss with olive oil.
While the pasta is boiling, wash and chop the kale. Heat the
olive oil in a large saucepan, add the chopped garlic, and then
quickly add the chopped kale. Stir until the kale is coated, add
salt and pepper to taste, add ½ cup water, and cover the pan
tightly. Steam-sauté until the greens are tender.
Combine the kale with the pasta, top with chopped walnuts,
and serve.
Menstrual Phase
PBJ Bowl
Serves 1
Cream of buckwheat
1 tablespoon raisins
1 tablespoon sunflower seed butter or almond butter
Hemp seeds
1 teaspoon maple syrup
Cook the cream of buckwheat according to package directions.
Mix the raisins in while hot. Drizzle sunflower seed or almond
butter on top. Top with hemp seeds and maple syrup.
Bento Salmon Soba Miso Lunch
Serves 2
2 4-ounce salmon fillets
Untoasted sesame oil to taste
Soy sauce to taste
1 8-ounce package buckwheat soba noodles
For the dressing
2 tablespoons low-sodium gluten-free tamari
¼ cup rice vinegar
1 tablespoon toasted sesame oil
For the soup
2 cups water
½ cup cubed tofu
2 scallions
2 tablespoons miso paste
1 nori sheet
Toasted sesame oil to taste
Grated daikon or pickled ginger (optional)
Preheat the oven to 350°. Toss the salmon in the untoasted
sesame oil and soy sauce, place in a baking dish, and bake for
12 minutes.
While the salmon is in the oven, boil the soba noodles
according to the package directions, rinse in cold water, and
drain.
While the soba noodles are boiling, whisk together the
dressing ingredients.
To make the soup: Bring 3 cups of water to a boil. Add the
chopped tofu and sliced scallions, and continue cooking for 30
seconds. Remove from the heat and evenly distribute into two
soup bowls. Stir 1 tablespoon miso paste into each bowl of
soup. Tear the nori sheet into pieces, and add to each bowl.
Drizzle with toasted sesame oil.
To assemble your bento, serve each diner the following:
A bowl of miso soup
A plate of cold soba noodles, with a dipping bowl of
dressing on the side
A plate of hot miso-glazed salmon
Optional: grated daikon radish and pickled ginger
Bunless Bison Burgers with the Works
Serves 2
½ pound ground bison meat
1 tablespoon coconut oil
½ red onion, chopped
1 package shitake mushrooms
1 package of baby spinach
1 avocado
Form the bison meat into 2 patties and grill on a barbecue, or
panfry for about 5 minutes on each side.
Heat a large saucepan to medium heat and add coconut oil.
Sauté the chopped onions for 2 minutes, then add the
mushrooms and sauté for another 2 to 3 minutes. Add the
spinach and cook until it’s wilted.
Add avocado slices to the burgers, and top with the spinach
and mushrooms. If you feel you need some carbs, add a
gluten-free bun. Enjoy!
In The FLO Downloadable
Guides and Resources
I have created many helpful resources, guides, and e-books to
help you as you get yourself in the FLO. You can find all of
them below with links.
Biohacking Guides
Hormone Supplement Guide:
www.FLOliving.com/supplement-guide
Fibroids: www.FLOliving.com/fibroids-guide
Endometriosis: www.FLOliving.com/endo-guide
PCOS: www.FLOliving.com/pcos-guide
PMS: www.FLOliving.com/pms-guide
Fertility: www.FLOliving.com/fertility-guide
Perimenopause: www.FLOliving.com/perimenopause-guide
Emotional Root Causes: www.FLOliving.com/emotions-
guide
Birth Control Rehab: www.FLOliving.com/birth-control-
rehab
Bonus In the FLO Content
See www.IntheFLObook.com/bonus for these guides:
Get In the FLO Now Quick-Start Program
Cyclical Self-Care Guide
Cyclical Skin-Care Guide
Adaptogen Guide
Access to the In the FLO Facebook group
More Support to Put into Action What You’ve
Learned in This Book
Join me and our community of women in the revolutionary
FLO 28: The Cycle Syncing™ Membership, an online group
membership for women around the world to care for their
bodies and find more flow in their lives. In FLO 28, you will
be supported with everything you learned in this book. You’ll
have access to five key tools to help you optimize your
biochemistry, leverage your neurochemistry, and live your best
life: phase-specific recipes and workouts, the Cycle Syncing
Method™ daily planner and guide, live monthly Q&A calls
with Alisa, and a dedicated, private Facebook group for
community support—as well as support from trained FLO
Living counselors and Alisa.
For more information, go to
www.cyclesyncingmembership.com. We hope to see you in
the FLO 28 community soon!
Connect with Me to Stay in Your FLO!
Alisa Vitti online
www.alisavitti.com
Stop by and say hello!
Instagram: @floliving and @alisa.vitti
Facebook: www.facebook.com/floliving
Pinterest: www.pinterest.com/alisavitti/
YouTube: www.youtube.com/user/FLOlivingTV
Twitter: twitter.com/FLOliving
FLO Living
Discover the modern menstrual health care company at
www.FLOliving.com.
FLO 28: The Cycle Syncing™ Membership
The revolutionary online program and community that
supports women to live in their FLO. Sign up at
www.cyclesyncingmembership.com.
MyFLO App
Download the only period tracker app that tells you what to do
to be symptom free and helps you sync with your cycle at
www.MyFLOtracker.com.
FLO Living’s Programs, Books, and Recommended
Supplements
You can find these all on www.FLOliving.com, home of the
first modern menstrual health care company. We work with
women all over the world who have any health issues from
PMS to fertility to postpartum to perimenopause to address
these symptoms naturally and safely using functional foods,
supplements, and lifestyle changes.
Monthly FLO: The most widely used digital hormone
recovery program worldwide, helping women put PCOS,
endometriosis, fibroids, infertility, and period symptoms
into remission naturally.
Balance Supplements: The bestselling female hormone
biohacking supplements delivered to your door every other
month. These five formulations provide essential
micronutrient support that you need to balance your
hormones.
One-on-One Support: Access our FLO coaches anytime to
talk through questions and concerns and to get support and
accountability to make lasting changes in your health and
life.
Acknowledgments
I am so appreciative of all the forces that conspired to make
this book possible. So many people have encouraged me to
believe in the audacity of this idea. Everything I’ve been able
to create is in direct proportion to the love and support I’ve
received.
My biggest thank-you goes out to my family. To my
daughter, Ariana, who was very patient for such a little girl
while I wrote this book, thank you for the gift of being your
mother. Thanks for playing “office” and “author” with me. To
my husband, Victor, thank you for believing in me and
encouraging me on my journey. Thank you for being the most
loving and supportive partner and devoted coparent and for
being in the FLO with me.
To my mother, for your eternal love. Thank you for always
encouraging me to go after my dreams and to follow my
passion. To my father, thank you for always believing that I
could do anything and for making the air I breathed as a little
girl filled with your belief that women are powerful forces of
nature. And to my mother and my paternal grandmother, for
showing you that. And to my two brothers and their families,
whom I love so much.
To Jelena Petrovic, thank you for being my sister. To Jess
G., Lori F., Jackie C., Lauren S., and Meredith G., thank you
for every conversation and your deep friendship.
To my incredible team at FLO Living, thank you for your
work to help me modernize menstrual health care, and for
helping women around the world know there is a place for
them where they will be seen, heard, and supported.
I also want to thank all the fellow female entrepreneurs
who have inspired me tremendously and supported me along
the way.
I want to give a special shout-out to Nisha Moodley, the
first woman to come to me and ask that I teach how I use my
cycle to manage my time, my self-care, and my career. I
appreciate you seeing me and holding space for me to
workshop my ideas at her mastermind.
Danielle DuBoise and Whitney Tingle from Sakara Life—
you have been incredible supporters from the way back.
Michele Promaulayko, thank you for being a champion of the
app and having me come teach the crew at Cosmo. Melisse
Gelula, thanks to you for all your support since my first book,
and for Well+Good making menstruation officially a wellness
trend! And to Colleen Wachob at MindBodyGreen for giving
me a space to share my message. To Claudia Chan and Dee
Poku, for believing in the power of this concept and inviting
me to share it in the sphere of women’s leadership.
Thank you to Marika Frumes for being an amazing
champion, to Hannah Bronfman for your support, and to Lee
Tilghman for being an example of cyclical living to so many.
To Josh Zabar and the Summit community, for getting me
and having me teach for the first time to both men and women.
Thank you to the women at SXSW for inviting me to be the
first female biohacker in the history of the conference.
JJ Virgin, thank you for your guidance and friendship.
Your generosity and integrity are unparalleled.
To Stephanie Tade, who is the most extraordinary literary
agent, thank you not only for getting this book concept, but
also for all your work and emotional support in midwifing this
book.
Hilary Swanson, my editor at HarperOne, it is a joy to
work with you. Thank you for believing in the message of this
book and helping me bring this book to life.
Thank you to Frances Sharpe for helping me pull all my
content together, for your research support, for talking through
my ideas, and for helping me refine this book. I loved each
one of our conversations. I am so grateful for all of your help
in making this book come to life.
To Judith Curr, thank you for being personally involved in
this book’s birth process.
To the team at HarperOne, thank you for the irresistible
invitation to do a second book with you. And thanks to
Melinda Mullin and Aly Mostel for taking such good care of
me.
To the FLO Living community all around the world, thank
you for believing in your body’s amazing capacity to heal, for
telling your stories of hormonal reclamation, and for spreading
this message to the women in your life. Your appetite to learn
more was the catalyst not only to create the MyFLO app but
also to write this book. Thank you for inspiring me and for
living in the FLO with me.
To my readers, thank you for trusting me, for your
willingness to step into the new with me, for believing that
you deserve a life that is easier, healthier, and more
pleasurable on your own terms and in your own time. Together
we can liberate ourselves, shift our cultural narrative to value
our biology, and make sure the next generation of young girls
know about their super powers from the start.
References
In order to maximize the content within book-length
constraints, I’ve selected key references here that provide the
scientific evidence and basis for this book. You can find the
complete bibliography of references for free at
www.IntheFLObook.com/references.
Chapter 1: Ending Your Mys-education
Allickson J and Xiang C. Human adult stem cells from menstrual blood and
endometrial tissue. Journal of Zhejiang University Science B. 2012;13(5):419–
20. https://doi.org/10.1631/jzus.B1200062
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, Committee on Adolescent
Health Care. “Menstruation in Girls and Adolescents: Using the Menstrual
Cycle as a Vital Sign.” Committee Opinion Number 651. Dec. 2015.
https://www.acog.org/Clinical-Guidance-and-Publications/Committee-
Opinions/Committee-on-Adolescent-Health-Care/Menstruation-in-Girls-and-
Adolescents-Using-the-Menstrual-Cycle-as-a-Vital-Sign
Bruinvels G, Burden RJ, McGregor AJ, et al. Sport, exercise and the menstrual
cycle: Where is the research? British Journal of Sports Medicine. 2017;51:487–
88. http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/bjsports-2016-096279
Buck S. “The Inventors of the Pill Decided Women Should Still Bleed Every
Month.” Timeline. May 3, 2017. https://timeline.com/birth-control-pill-history-
marketing-e77ce609e749
Campaign to End Chronic Pain in Women. “Chronic Pain in Women: Neglect,
Dismissal, and Discrimination.” 2010. www.endwomenspain.org/Common/file?
id=20
Costello JT, Bieuzen F, and Bleakley CM. Where are all the female participants in
sports and exercise medicine research? European Journal of Sport Science.
2014;14(8):847–51. https://doi.org/10.1080/17461391.2014.911354
Dominguez-Bello MG, De Jesus-Laboy KM, Shen H, et al. Partial restoration of the
microbiota of cesarean-born infants via vaginal microbial transfer. Nature
Medicine. 2016;22(3):250–53. https://doi.org/10.1038/nm.4039
Dusenbery M. Doing Harm: The Truth About How Bad Medicine and Lazy Science
Leave Women Dismissed, Misdiagnosed, and Sick. New York: HarperOne,
2018.
Faro M, Sàez-Francás N, Castro-Marrero J, et al. Gender differences in chronic
fatigue syndrome. Reumatologia Clinica, 2016;12(2):72–77.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.reuma.2015.05.007
Harlow SD and Ephross SA. Epidemiology of menstruation and its relevance to
women’s health. Epidemiological Review. 1995;17(2):265–86.
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8654511
Harvey RE, Coffman KE, and Miller VM. Women-specific factors to consider in
risk, diagnosis and treatment of cardiovascular disease. Women’s Health.
2015;11(2):239–57. https://doi.org/10.2217/whe.14.64
Liu KA and Dipietro Mager NA. Women’s involvement in clinical trials: Historical
perspective and future implications. Pharmacy Practice. 2016;14(1):708.
https://doi.org/10:18549/PharmPract.2016.01.708
Mazure CM and Jones DP. Twenty years and still counting: Including women as
participants and studying sex and gender in biomedical research. BMC Women’s
Health. 2015;15:94. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12905-015-0251-9
National Institutes of Health. “The BioCycle Study. A Longitudinal Study of
Estrogen and Progesterone Effects on Biomarkers of Oxidative Stress and
Antioxidant Status During the Menstrual Cycle.”
https://www.nichd.nih.gov/about/org/diphr/officebranch/eb/biocycle
Pinn VW. Sex and gender factors in medical studies: Implications for health and
clinical practice. JAMA. 2003;289(4):397–400.
https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.289.4.397
Women’s health: Report of the Public Health Service Task Force on women’s
health issues. Public Health Reports. 1985;100(1):73–106.
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1424718/?page=2
Xiao S, Coppeta JR, Rogers HB, et al. A microfluiditic culture model of the human
reproductive tract and 28-day menstrual cycle. Nature Communications.
2017;8:14584. https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms14584
Chapter 2: Break Free from the 24-Hour Clock
Baker FC and Driver HS. Circadian rhythms, sleep, and the menstrual cycle. Sleep
Medicine. 2007;8(6):613–22. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sleep.2006.09.011
Baron KG and Reid KJ. Circadian misalignment and health. International Review
of Psychiatry 2014 Apr;26(2):139–54.
https://doi.org/10.3109/09540261.2014.911149
Bellezza S, Paharia N, and Keinan A. Conspicuous consumption of time: When
busyness and lack of leisure time become a status symbol. Journal of Consumer
Research. 2017; 44(1):118–38. https://doi.org/10.1093/jcr/ucw076
Breus M. The Power of When: Discover Your Chronotype and the Best Time to Eat
Lunch, Ask for a Raise, Have Sex, Write a Novel, Take Your Meds, and More.
New York: Little, Brown, 2016.
Chang A-M, Aeschbach D, Duffy JF, et al. Evening use of light-emitting eReaders
negatively affects sleep, circadian timing, and next-morning alertness. PNAS.
2015; 112(4)1232–37. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1418490112
Csikszentmihalyi M. Flow. New York: Harper, 1990.
de Botton A. Status Anxiety. New York: Vintage Books, 2008.
Dietrich A. Neurocognitive mechanisms underlying the experience of flow.
Consciousness and Cognition. 2004;13:746–61.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.concog.2004.07.002
Etkin J, Evangelidis I, and Aaker J. Pressed for time? Goal conflict shapes how
time is perceived, spent, and valued. Journal of Marketing Research.
2015;52(3):394–406. https://doi.org/10.1509/jmr.14.0130
Maslow A. Motivation and Personality, 3rd ed. New York: Longman, 1987.
National Institute of General Medicine Science. “Circadian Rhythms.”
https://www.nigms.nih.gov/education/pages/Factsheet_CircadianRhythms.aspx
Nicolaides NC, Charmandari E, Chrousos GP, et al. Circadian endocrine rhythms:
The hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis and its actions. Annals of the New York
Academy of Sciences. 2014;1318:71–80. https://doi.org/10.1111/nyas.12464
NobelPrize.org. “The 2017 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine.” Press release,
Oct. 2, 2017.
https://www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/medicine/laureates/2017/press.html
Saran S and Srikumar M. “AI has a Gender Problem. Here’s What to Do About It.”
World Economic Forum, 2018. https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2018/04/ai-
has-a-gender-problem-heres-what-to-do-about-it/
Schmidt C and Bao Y. Chronobiological research for cognitive science: A
multifaceted view. PsyCh Journal. 2017;6(4)249–52.
https://doi.org/10.1002/pchj.203
Schulte B. Overwhelmed: Work, Love, and Play When No One Has the Time. New
York: Sarah Crichton Books, 2014.
Schwartz T and McCarthy C. “Manage Your Energy, Not Your Time.” Harvard
Business Review. Oct. 2007. https://hbr.org/2007/10/manage-your-energy-not-
your-time
Semaan J. “The Hungry Ghost and Always Wanting More.” Medium.com. Feb. 10,
2017. https://medium.com/@jessicasemaan/the-hungry-ghost-and-always-
wanting-more-2bb397dbdc10
Sensi S, Pace Palitti V, and Guagnano MT. Chronobiology in endocrinology. Annali
dell’Istituto Superiore di Sanita. 1993;29(4):613–31.
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/7985925
Shechter A and Boivin DB. Sleep, hormones, and circadian rhythms throughout the
menstrual cycle in healthy women and women with premenstrual dysphoric
disorder. International Journal of Endocrinology. 2010;2010:259345.
https://doi.org/10.1155/2010/259345
Winget CM, DeRoshia CW, and Holley DC. Circadian rhythms and athletic
performance. Medicine and Science in Sports Exercise. 1985;17(5):498–516.
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/3906341
Chapter 3: Beyond Your Period—Understanding Your
Hormonal Advantages
Alvergne A and Tabor VH. Is female health cyclical? Evolutionary perspectives on
menstruation. Trends in Ecology & Evolution. 2018;33(6):399–414.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tree.2018.03.006
Amen DG. Unleash the Power of the Female Brain. New York: Harmony Books,
2013.
Amin Z, Canli T, and Epperson C. Effect of estrogen-serotonin interactions on
mood and cognition. Behavioral and Cognitive Neuroscience Reviews.
2005;4(1):43–58. https://doi.org/10.1177/1534582305277152
Arciero PJ, Goran MI, and Poehlman ET. Resting metabolic rate is lower in women
than in men. Journal of Applied Physiology. 1993;75(6):2514:20.
https://doi.org/10.1152/jappl.1993.75.6.2514
Baker FC and Driver HS. Circadian rhythms, sleep, and the menstrual cycle. Sleep
Medicine. 2007;8(6):613–22. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sleep.2006.09.011
Baker JM, Al-Nakkash L, and Herbst-Kralovetz MM. Estrogen-gut microbiome
axis: Physiological and clinical implications. Maturitas. 2017;103:45–53.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.maturitas.2017.06.025
Barsom SH, Mansfield PK, Koch PB, et al. Association between psychological
stress and menstrual cycle characteristics in perimenopausal women. Women’s
Health Issues. 2004;14(6)235–41. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.whi.2004.07.006
Barth C, Villringer A, and Sacher J. Sex hormones affect neurotransmitters and
shape the adult female brain during hormonal transition periods. Frontiers in
Neuroscience. 2015;9:37. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2015.00037
Barth C, Steele CJ, Mueller K, et al. In-vivo dynamics of the human hippocampus
across the menstrual cycle. Scientific Reports. 2016;6:32833.
https://doi.org/10.1038/srep32833
Borelli L. “Menstruation and the Female Brain: How Fluctuating Hormone Levels
Impact Cognitive Function.” Medical Daily. July 8, 2015.
https://www.medicaldaily.com/menstruation-and-female-brain-how-fluctuating-
hormone-levels-impact-cognitive-341788
Brizendine L. The Female Brain. New York: Harmony Books, 2006.
Cavill R, Eccleston C, Keogh E, et al. The effects of menstrual-related pain on
attentional interference. PAIN. 2014;155(4):821–27.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pain.2014.01.021
Chen KL and Madak-Erdogan Z. Estrogen and microbiota crosstalk: Should we pay
attention? Trends in Endocrinology and Metabolism. 2016;27:752–55.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tem.2016.08.001
Cornelis MC, El-Sohemy A, Kabagambe EK, et al. Coffee, CYP1A2 genotype, and
risk of myocardial infarction. JAMA. 2006;295(10):1135–41.
https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.295.10.1135
Davidsen L, Vistisen B, and Astrup A. Impact of the menstrual cycle on
determinants of energy balance: A putative role in weight loss attempts.
International Journal of Obesity (London). 2007;31:1777–85.
https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.ijo.0803699
De Zambotti M, Nicholas CL, Colrain IM, et al. Autonomic regulation across
phases of the menstrual cycle and sleep stages in women with premenstrual
syndrome and healthy controls. Psychoneuroendocrinology.
2013;38(11):10.1016/j.psyneuen.2013.06.005.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psyneuen.2013.06.005
Dye L and Blundell JE. Menstrual cycle and appetite control: Implications for
weight regulation. Human Reproduction. 1997;12(6):1142–51.
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9221991
Fransen F, van Beek A, Borghuis T, et al. The impact of gut microbiota on gender-
specific differences in immunity. Frontiers in Immunology. 2017:8:754.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2017.00754
Gillies GE and McArthur S. Estrogen actions in the brain and the basis for
differential action in men and women: A case for sex-specific medicines.
Pharmacological Reviews. 2010;62(2):155–98.
https://doi.org/10.1124/pr.109.002071
Goel N, Workman JL, Lee TT, et al. Sex differences in the HPA axis.
Comprehensive Physiology. 2014;4(3):1121–55.
https://doi.org/10.1002/cphy.c130054
Goldman, B. “Two Minds: The Cognitive Differences Between Men and Women.”
Stanford Medicine. Spring 2017, Sex, Gender and Medicine.
https://stanmed.stanford.edu/2017spring/how-mens-and-womens-brains-are-
different.html
Grigg-Spall H. Sweetening the Pill or How We Got Hooked on Hormonal Birth
Control. Hants, UK: Zero Books, 2013.
Hamilton LD and Meston CM. Chronic stress and sexual function in women. The
Journal of Sexual Medicine. 2013;10(10):2443–54.
https://doi.org/10.1111/jsm.12249
Hinojosa-Laborde C, Chapa I, and Haywood JR. Gender differences in sympathetic
nervous system regulation. Clinical and Experimental Pharmacology and
Physiology. 1999: 26(2):122–26. https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1440–
1681.1999.02995.x
Hulmi JJ, Isola V, Suonpää M, et al. The effects of intensive weight reduction on
body composition in female fitness competitors. Frontiers in Physiology.
2017;7:689. https://doi.org/10.3389/fphys.2016.00689
Klein SL and Flanagan KL. Sex differences in immune responses. Nature Reviews
Immunology. 2016;16:626–38. https://doi.org/10.1038/nri.2016.90
Koebnick C, Strassner C, Hoffmann I, et al. Consequences of a long-term raw food
diet on body weight and menstruation: Results of a questionnaire survey. Annals
of Nutrition & Metabolism. 1999;43(2):69–79.
https://doi.org/10.1159/000012770
Kwo PY, Ramchandani VA, and O’Connor S, et al. Gender differences in alcohol
metabolism: Relationship to liver volume and effect of adjusting for body mass.
Gastroenterology. 1998;115(6):1552–57.
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9834284
Lipton BH. The Biology of Belief: Unleashing the Power of Consciousness, Matter
& Miracles. Carlsbad, CA: Hay House, 2005.
Lisofsky N, Mårtenssom J, Eckert A, et al. Hippocampal volume and functional
connectivity changes during the female menstrual cycle. NeuroImage.
2015;118:154–62. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2015.06.012
McCarthy, MM. Estrogen modulation of oxytocin and its relation to behavior.
Advances in Experimental Medicine and Biology. 1995;395:235–45.
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8713972
McEwen BS, Gray JD, and Nasca C. Redefining neuroendocrinology: Stress, sex,
and cognitive and emotional regulation. The Journal of Endocrinology.
2015;226(2):T67–T83. https://doi.org/10.1530/JOE-1-0121
National Institutes of Health. “The BioCycle Study. A Longitudinal Study of
Estrogen and Progesterone Effects on Biomarkers of Oxidative Stress and
Antioxidant Status During the Menstrual Cycle.” June 2018.
https://www.nichd.nih.gov/about/org/diphr/officebranch/eb/biocycle
Ngun TC, Ghahramani N, Sánchez FJ, et al. The genetics of sex differences in brain
and behavior. Frontiers in Neuroendocrinology. 2011;32(2):227–46.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.yfrne.2010.10.001
Oertelt-Prigione S. Immunology and the menstrual cycle. Autoimmunity Reviews.
2012;11(6):A486–92. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autrev.2011.11.023
Roved J, Westerdahl H, and Hasselquist D. Sex differences in immune responses:
Hormonal effects, antagonistic selection, and evolutionary consequences.
Hormones and Behavior. 2017;88:95–105.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.yhbeh.2016.11.017
Shechter A and Boivin DB. Sleep, hormones, and circadian rhythms throughout the
menstrual cycle in healthy women and women with premenstrual dysphoric
disorder. International Journal of Endocrinology. 2010;2010:259345.
https://doi.org/10.1155/2010/259345
Solomon SJ, Kurzer MS, and Calloway DH. Menstrual cycle and basal metabolic
rate in women. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 1982;36(4):611–16.
https://doi.org/10.1093/ajcn/36.4.611
Sundström Poromaa I and Gingnell M. Menstrual cycle influence on cognitive
function and emotion processing—from a reproductive perspective. Frontiers in
Neuroscience. 2014;8:380. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2014.00380
Taylor SE, Klein LC, Lewis BP, et al. Biobehavioral responses to stress in females:
Tend-and-befriend, not fight-or-flight. Psychological Review. 2000;107:411–29.
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10941275
Tu C-H, Niddam DM, Chao H-T, et al. Brain morphological changes associated
with cyclic menstrual pain. PAIN. 2010;150(3):462.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pain.2010.05.026
Ullrich IH, Peters PJ, and Albrink MJ. Effect of low-carbohydrate diets high in
either fat or protein on thyroid function, plasma insulin, glucose, and
triglycerides in healthy young adults. Journal of the American College of
Nutrition. 1985;4(4):451–59. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?
term=3900181
Urbaniak C, Gloor GB, Brackstone M, et al. The microbiota of breast tissue and its
association with breast cancer. Applied and Environmental Microbiology.
2016;82(16):5039–48. https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.01235-16
Weaver L. Rushing Woman’s Syndrome: The Impact of a Never-Ending To-Do List
and How to Stay Healthy in Today’s Busy World. London: Hay House, 2017.
Zagni E, Simoni L, and Colombo D. Sex and gender differences in central nervous
system–related disorders. Neuroscience Journal. 2016;2016:2827090.
https://doi.org/10.1155/2016/2827090
Zethraeus N, Kocoska-Maras L, Ellingsen T, et al. A randomized trial of the effect
of estrogen and testosterone on economic behavior. PNAS. 2009;106(16)6535–
38; https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0812757106
Chapter 4: Never Diet Again
American Cancer Society. “Fibrosis and Simple Cysts of the Breast.”
https://www.cancer.org/cancer/breast-cancer/non-cancerous-breast-
conditions/fibrosis-and-simple-cysts-in-the-breast.html
Baker JM, Al Nakkash L, and Herbst-Kralovetz MM. Estrogen–gut microbiome
axis: Physiological and clinical implications. Maturitas. 2017;103:45–53.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.maturitas.2017.06.025
Beilharz JE, Maniam J, and Morris MJ. Diet-induced cognitive deficits: The role of
fat and sugar, potential mechanisms, and nutritional interventions. Nutrients.
2015;7:6719–38. https://doi.org/10.3390/nu7085307
Bertone-Johnson ER, Hankinson SE, Bendich A, et al. Calcium and vitamin D
intake and risk of incident premenstrual syndrome. Archives of Internal
Medicine. 2005;165(11):1246–52. https://doi.org/10.1001/arcinte.165.11.1246
Bolúmar F, Olsen J, Rebagliato M, et al. Caffeine intake and delayed conception: A
European multicenter study on infertility and subfecundity. European Study
Group on Infertility Subfecundity. American Journal of Epidemiology.
1997;145(4):324–34. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9054236
Buchhorn R. The impact of nutrition on the autonomic nervous system.
International Journal of Food and Nutritional Science. 2016.
https://www.ommegaonline.org/article-details/The-Impact-of-Nutrition-on-the-
Autonomic-Nervous-System-/942
Carwile JL, Willett WC, Spiegelman D, et al. Sugar-sweetened beverage
consumption and age at menarche in a prospective study of US girls. Human
Reproduction. 2015;30(3): 675–83. https://doi.org/10.1093/humrep/deu349
Chandra RK. Nutrition and the immune system from birth to old age. European
Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 2002;56:S73–S76.
https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.ejcn.1601492
Chavarro JE, Rich-Edwards JW, Rosner BA, et al. Diet and lifestyle in the
prevention of ovulatory disorder infertility. Obstetrics & Gynecology.
2007;110(5):1050–58. https://doi.org/10.1097/01.AOG.0000287293.25465.e1
Chen M-N, Lin C-C, and Liu CF. Efficacy of phytoestrogens for menopausal
symptoms: A meta-analysis and systematic review. Climacteric.
2015;18(2):260–69. https://doi.org/10.3109/13697137.2014.966241
Ghanbari Z, Haghollahi F, Shariat M, et al. Effects of calcium supplement therapy
in women with premenstrual syndrome. Taiwanese Journal of Obstetrics and
Gynecology. 2009;48(2):124–29. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1028-
4559(09)60271-0
Gómez-Pinilla F. Brain foods: The effects of nutrients on brain function. Nature
Reviews Neuroscience; 2008(9):568–78. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn2421
Gottfried S. The Hormone Reset Diet: Heal Your Metabolism to Lose Up to 15
Pounds in 21 Days. New York: HarperOne, 2015.
Hall A. “Seed Cycling for Hormonal Balance.” Herbal Academy. Apr. 20, 2014.
https://theherbalacademy.com/seed-cycling-for-hormonal-balance/
Itoh H, Sashihara T, Hosono A, Kaminogawa S, and Uchida M. Lactobacillus
gasseri OLL2809 inhibits development of ectopic endometrial cell in peritoneal
cavity via activation of NK cells in a murine endometriosis model.
Cytotechnology. 2011;63(2): 205–10. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10616-0111-
9343-z
Jahanian E, Nanaei HA, and Kor NM. The dietary fatty acids and their effects on
reproductive performance of ruminants. European Journal of Experimental
Biology. 2013;3(6):95–97. http://www.imedpub.com/articles/the-dietary-fatty-
acids-and-their-effects-on-reproductiveperformance-of-ruminants.pdf
Koebnick C, Strassner C, Hoffman I, et al. Consequences of a long-term raw food
diet on body weight and menstruation: Results of a questionnaire survey. Annals
of Nutrition & Metabolism. 1999;43(2):69–79.
https://doi.org/10.1159/000012770
Kumar S and Kaur G. Intermittent fasting dietary restriction regimen negatively
influences reproduction in young rats: a study of hypothalamo-hypophysial-
gonadal axis. PLOS ONE. 2013;8(1):e52416.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0052416
Mueller NT, Jacobs DR, MacLehose RF, et al. Consumption of caffeinated and
artificially sweetened soft drinks is associated with risk of early menarche.
American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 2015;102(3):648–54.
https://doi.org/10.3945/acjn.114.100958
Mumford SL, Chavarro JE, Zhang C, et al. Dietary fat intake and reproductive
hormone concentrations and ovulation in regularly menstruating women.
American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 2016;103(3):868–77.
https://doi.org/10.3945/ajcn.115.119321
Oertelt-Prigione S. Immunology and the menstrual cycle. Autoimmunity Reviews.
2012;11(6):A486–92. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autrev.2011.11.023
Rostenberg A. “Treating COMT and MAO: The Hormonal Cause of Stress and
Anxiety.” Beyond MTHFR. Aug. 27, 2015.
http://www.beyondmthfr.com/treating-comt-and-mao-the-hormonal-cause-of-
stress-and-anxiety/
Sarris J, Logan AC, Akbaraly TN, et al. Nutritional medicine as mainstream in
psychiatry. Lancet Psychiatry. 2015 Mar;2(3):271–74.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S2215-0366(14)00051-0
Sisson M. The Keto Reset Diet: Reboot Your Metabolism in 21 Days and Burn Fat
Forever. New York, Harmony, 2017.
Thys-Jacobs S, Starkey P, Bernstein D, et al. Calcium carbonate and the
premenstrual syndrome: Effects on premenstrual and menstrual symptoms.
American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology. 1998;179(2):444–52.
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9731851
Ullrich IH, Peter PJ, and Albrink MJ. Effect of low-carbohydrate diets high in
either fat or protein on thyroid function, plasma insulin, glucose, and
triglycerides in healthy young adults. Journal of the American College of
Nutrition. 1985;4(4):451–59. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/3900181
Ulrich-Lai YM, Figueiriedo HF, Ostrander MM, et al. Chronic stress induces
adrenal hyperplasia and hypertrophy in a subregion-specific manner. American
Journal of Physiology. 2006; 291(5):E965–73.
https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpendo.00070.2006
Wolfrom D and Welsch CW. Caffeine and the development of normal, benign and
carcinomatous human breast tissues: a relationship? Journal of Medicine.
1990;21(5):225–50. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/2079614
Wurtman J and Fruzstajer NJ. The Serotonin Power Diet. New York: Rodale, 2009.
Wurtman RJ and Wurtman JJ. Brain serotonin, carbohydrate-craving, obesity and
depression. Obesity Research. 1995;3(suppl 4):477S–80S.
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8697046
Chapter 5: Work Out Less, Get More Fit
Bruinvels G, Burden RJ, McGregor AJ, et al. Sport, exercise and the menstrual
cycle: Where is the research? British Journal of Sports Medicine. 2017;51:487–
88. https://doi.org/10.1136/bjsports-2016-096279
Clennell B. The Woman’s Yoga Book: Asana and Pranayama for All Phases of the
Menstrual Cycle. Boulder, CO: Shambhala Publications, 2007.
Curtis V, Henry CJK, Birch E, et al. Intraindividual variation in the basal metabolic
rate of women: Effect of the menstrual cycle. American Journal of Human
Biology. 1996;8(5):631–39. https://doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1520-
6300(1996)8:5<631::AID-AJHB8>3.0.CO;2-Y
Janse de Jonge XA. Effects of the menstrual cycle on exercise performance. Sports
Medicine. 2003;33(11):833–51.
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12959622
Jarlenski MP, Bennett WL, Bleich SN, et al. Effects of breastfeeding on postpartum
weight loss among U.S. women. Preventive Medicine. 2014;69:146–50.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ypmed.2014.09.018
Johnson KA. The Fourth Trimester: A Postpartum Guide to Healing Your Body,
Balancing Your Emotions, and Restoring Your Vitality. Boulder, CO: Shambhala
Publications, 2017.
Julian R, Hecksteden A, Fullagar HHK, et al. The effects of menstrual cycle phase
on physical performance in female soccer players. PLOS ONE. 2017;12(3):
e0173951. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0173951
Landsverk G. “The World Cup-Winning US Women’s Soccer Team Tracked Their
Periods for Peak Performance, and Evidence Shows Everyday Athletes Can
Benefit from Doing the Same.” Insider. July 23, 2019.
https://www.insider.com/world-cup-winning-uswnt-period-tracking-how-to-
improve-performance-2019-7
Lee CW, Newman MA, and Riechman SE. Oral contraceptive use impairs muscle
gains in young women. The FASEB Journal. 2009;23(1-suppl).
https://www.fasebj.org/doi/abs/10.1096/fasebj.23.1_supplement.955.25
Ou H. The First Forty Days: The Essential Art of Nourishing the New Mother. New
York: Abrams, 2016.
Sims ST. Roar: How to Match Your Food and Fitness to Your Female Physiology
for Optimum Performance, Great Health, and a Strong, Lean Body for Life.
New York: Rodale, 2016.
Sung E, Han A, Hinrichs T, et al. Effects of follicular versus luteal phase-based
strength training in young women. SpringerPlus. 2014;3:668.
https://doi.org/10.1186/2193-1801-3-668
Chapter 6: Your Blueprint to Do More with Less Stress
Ansell AB, Rando K, Tuit K, et al. Cumulative adversity and smaller gray matter
volume in medial prefrontal, anterior cingulate, and insula regions. Biological
Psychiatry. 2012;72(1):57–64. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsych.2011.11.022
Chetty A, Friedman AR, Taravosh-Lahn K, et al. Stress and glucocorticoids
promote oligodendrogenesis in the adult hippocampus. Molecular Psychiatry.
2014;19:1275–83. https://www.nature.com/articles/mp2013190
Forsythe P, Sudo N, Dinan T, et al. Mood and gut feelings. Brain Behavior, and
Immunity. 2010;24(1):9–16. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbi.2009.05.058
Mathur MB, Epel E, Kind S, et al. Perceived stress and telomere length: A
systematic review, meta-analysis, and methodologic considerations for
advancing the field. Brain, Behavior, and Immunity. 2016;54:158–69.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbi.2016.02.002
Northrup C. Women’s Bodies, Women’s Wisdom. New York: Bantam Books, 2010.
Panda S. The Circadian Code: Lose Weight, Supercharge Your Energy, and
Transform Your Health from Morning to Midnight. New York: Rodale Books,
2018.
Biohacking Tool Kit
Behre HM, Zitzmann M, Anderson RA, et al. Efficacy and safety of an injectable
combination hormonal contraceptive for men. The Journal of Clinical
Endocrinology & Metabolism. 2016;101(12):4779–88.
https://doi.org/10.1210/jc.2016-2141
Berenson AB and Rahman M. Changes in weight, total fat, percent body fat, and
central-to-peripheral fat ratio associated with injectable and oral contraceptive
use. American Journal of Obstetrics & Gynecology. 2009;200(3):329.e1–8.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajog.2008.12.052
Ebrahimi E, Khayati Motlagh S, Nemati S, et al. Effects of magnesium and vitamin
B6 on the severity of premenstrual syndrome symptoms. Journal of Caring
Sciences. 2012;1(4):183–89. https://doi.org/10.5681/jcs.2012.026
Faryal U, Rashid S, Hajra B, et al. Effect of hormonal contraceptives on serum
serotonin in females of reproductive age group. Journal of Ayub Medical
College Abbottabad. 2016;28(1):56–58.
Fisher MM, Eugster EA. What is in our environment that effects puberty?
Reproductive Toxicology (Elmsford, NY). 2014;44:7–14.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.reprotox.2013.03.012
Grosso G, Galvano F, Marventano S, et al. Omega-3 fatty acids and depression:
Scientific evidence and biological mechanisms. Oxidative Medicine and
Cellular Longevity. 2014; 2014:313570. https://doi.org/10.1155/2014/313570
Hertel J, König J, and Homuth G. Evidence for stress-like alterations in the HPA-
axis in women taking oral contraceptives. Scientific Reports. 2017;7(1):14111.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-017-13927-7
Hill S. This Is Your Brain on Birth Control. New York: Avery, 2019.
Islam MS, Akhtar MM, Ciavattini A, et al. Use of dietary phytochemicals to target
inflammation, fibrosis, proliferation, and angiogenesis in uterine tissues:
promising options for prevention and treatment of uterine fibroids? Molecular
Nutrition & Food Research. 2014;58(8):1667–84.
https://doi.org/10.1002/mnfr.201400134
Ji K, Kho YL, Park Y, et al. Influence of a five-day vegetarian diet on urinary levels
of antibiotics and phthalate metabolites: A pilot study with “Temple Stay”
participants. Environmental Research. 2010;110(4):375–82.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2010.02.008
Khalili H, Higuchi LM, Ananthakrishnan AN, et al. Oral contraceptives,
reproductive factors and risk of inflammatory bowel disease. Gut.
2013;62:1153–59. https://doi.org/10.1136/gutjnl-2012-302362
Kiecolt-Glaser JK, Belury MA, Andridge R, et al. Omega-3 supplementation
lowers inflammation and anxiety in medical students: A randomized controlled
trial. Brain, Behavior, and Immunity. 2011; 25(8):1725–34.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbi.2011.07.229
King DE, Mainous AG 3rd, Geesey ME, et al. Dietary magnesium and C-reactive
protein levels. Journal of the American College of Nutrition. 2005;24(3):166–
71. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15930481
Lee CW, Newman MA, and Riechman SE. Oral contraceptive use impairs muscle
gains in young women. The FASEB Journal. 2009;23:1(suppl).
https://www.fasebj.org/doi/abs/10.1096/fasebj.23.1_supplement.955.25
Lopez LM, Ramesh S, Chen M, et al. Progestin-only contraceptives: Effects on
weight. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 2016;(8):CD008815.
https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD008815.pub4
Morabia A. APHA Voices from the Nurses’ Health Study. American Journal of
Public Health. 2016;106(9):1530–31.
https://doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.2016.303370
Mørch LS, Skovlund CW, Hannaford PC, et al. Contemporary hormonal
contraception and the risk of breast cancer. New England Journal of Medicine.
2017;377:2228–39. https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1700732
Oates L, Cohen M, Braun L, et al. Reduction in urinary organophosphate pesticide
metabolites in adults after a week-long organic diet. Environmental Research.
2014; 132:105–11. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2014.03.021
Pal L, Shu J, Zeitlian G, et al. Vitamin D insufficiency in reproductive years may be
contributory to ovulatory infertility and PCOS. Fertility and Sterility.
2008;90:S14. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fertnstert.2008.07.382
Pletzer BA and Kerschbaum HH. 50 years of hormonal contraception—time to find
out, what it does to our brain. Frontiers in Neuroscience. 2014;8:256.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2014.00256
Roberts SC, Gosling LM, Carter V, et al. MHC-correlated odour preferences in
humans and the use of oral contraceptives. The Proceedings of the Royal
Society B. 2008, 275(1652): 2715–22. https://doi.org/10.1098/rspb.2008.0825
Rodríguez-Morán M and Gerrero-Romero F. Oral magnesium supplementation
improves insulin sensitivity and metabolic control in type 2 diabetic subjects.
Diabetes Care. 2003; 26(4):1147–52. https://doi.org/10.2337/diacare.26.4.1147
Rudick B, Ingles S, Chung K, et al. Characterizing the influence of vitamin D levels
on IVF outcomes. Human Reproduction. 2012 Nov;27(11):3321–27.
https://doi.org/10.1093/humrep/des280
Sartori SB, Whittle N, Hetzenauer A, et al. Magnesium deficiency induces anxiety
and HPA axis dysregulation: Modulation by therapeutic drug treatment.
Neuropharmacology. 2012;62(1):304–12.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropharm.2011.07.027
Seifert B, Wagler P, Dartsch S, et al. Magnesium—A new therapeutic alternative in
primary dysmenorrhea. Zentralblatt fur Gynakologie. 1989;111(11):755–60.
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/2675496
Skovlund CW, Mørch LS, Kessing LV, et al. Association of hormonal contraception
with depression. JAMA Psychiatry. 2016;73(11):1154–62.
https://doi.org/10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2016.2387
Tijani JO, Fatoba OO, Babajide OO, et al. Pharmaceuticals, endocrine disruptors,
personal care products, nanomaterials and perfluorinated pollutants: A review.
Environmental Chemistry Letters. 2016;14:27. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10311-
015-0537-z
United Nations Environment Programme and World Health Organization. “Effects
of Human Exposure to Hormone-Disrupting Chemicals Examined in Landmark
UN Report.” World Health Organization. Feb. 19, 2013.
http://www.who.int/mediacentre/news/releases/2013/hormone_disrupting_2013
0219/en/
Usselman CW, Luchyshyn TA, Gimon TI, et al. Hormone phase dependency of
neural responses to chemoreflex-driven sympathoexcitation in young women
using hormonal contraceptives. Journal of Applied Physiology.
2013;115(10):1415–22. https://doi.org/10.1152/japplphysiol.00681.2013
Wang Q, Würtz P, Auro K, et al. Effects of hormonal contraception on systemic
metabolism: Cross-sectional and longitudinal evidence. International Journal of
Epidemiology. 2016;45(5):1445–57. https://doi.org/10.1093/ije/dyw147
Webb JL. Nutritional effects of oral contraceptive use: A review. The Journal of
Reproductive Medicine. 1980;25(4):150–56.
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/7001015
Williams WV. Hormonal contraception and the development of autoimmunity: A
review of the literature. The Linacre Quarterly. 2017;84(3):275–95.
https://doi.org/10.1080/00243639.2017.1360065
Zafari M, Behmanesh F, and Agha Mohammadi A. Comparison of the effect of fish
oil and ibuprofen on treatment of severe pain in primary dysmenorrhea.
Caspian Journal of Internal Medicine. 2011;2(3):279–82.
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3770499/
Chapter 7: Sustainable Success at Work
American Academy of Pediatrics. School start times for adolescents. Pediatrics.
2014; 134(3). http://pediatrics.aappublications.org/content/134/3/642?
ijkey=ebc1dd1839 d660bbbf2008739ab9cd8cd2b407f3&keytype2=tf_ipsecsha
Ariga A and Lleras A. Brief and rare mental “breaks” keep you focused:
Deactivation and reactivation of task goals preempt vigilance decrements.
Cognition. 2011;118(3):439–43. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2010.12.007
Baddeley B, Sornalingam S, and Cooper M. Sitting is the new smoking: Where do
we stand? The British Journal of General Practice. 2016;66(646):258.
https://doi.org/10.3399/bjgp16X685009
Baicker K, Cutler D, and Song Z. Workplace wellness programs can generate
savings. Health Affairs. 2010;29(2). https://doi.org/10.1377/hlthaff.2009.0626
Dunn M. “Who Chooses Part-Time Work and Why?” Monthly Labor Review, U.S.
Bureau of Labor Statistics. March 2018. https://doi.org/10.21916/mlr.2018.8
Gerzema J and D’Antonio M. The Athena Doctrine: How Women (and the Men
Who Think Like Them) Will Rule the Future. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 2013.
Gorman R. “Women Now Control More Than Half of US Personal Wealth, Which
‘Will Only Increase in Years to Come.’” Business Insider. Apr. 7, 2015.
https://www.businessinsider.com/women-now-control-more-than-half-of-us-
personal-wealth-2015-4
Green Carmichael S. “The Research Is Clear: Long Hours Backfire for People and
for Companies.” Harvard Business Review. Aug. 19, 2015.
https://hbr.org/2015/08/the-research-is-clear-long-hours-backfire-for-people-
and-for-companies
Marano HE. “Biorhythms: Get in Step.” Psychology Today. 2004.
https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/articles/200404/biorhythms-get-in-step
Miller J and Adkins A. “Women Lead Men on Key Workplace Engagement
Measures.” Gallup. Nov. 16, 2016.
http://news.gallup.com/businessjournal/197552/women-lead-men-key-
workplace-engagement-measures.aspx
Noland M, Moran T, and Kotschwar B. Is gender diversity profitable? Evidence
from a global survey. Peterson Institute for International Economics Working
Paper. 2016;16–3. http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2729348
Robbins T. Awaken the Giant Within. New York: Free Press, 1991.
Sundström Poromaa I and Gingnell M. Menstrual cycle influence on cognitive
function and emotion processing—from a reproductive perspective. Frontiers in
Neuroscience. 2014;8:380. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2014.00380
Trougakos JP and Hideg I. Momentary work recovery: The role of within-day work
breaks. In Sonnentag S, Perrewé P, and Ganster DC (eds.), Research in
occupational stress and well being: Vol. 7. Current perspectives on job-stress
recovery (pp. 37–84). Bingley, UK: JAI Press/Emerald Group Publishing.
http://psycnet.apa.org/record/2010-12072-002
Watson NF, Martin JL, Wise MS, et al. Delaying middle school and high school
start times promotes student health and performance: An American Academy of
Sleep Medicine position statement. Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine.
2017;13(4):623–25. https://doi.org/10.5664/jcsm.6558
Woolley CS, Wenzel HJ, and Schwartzkroin PA. Estradiol increases the frequency
of multiple synapse boutons in the hippocampal CA1 region of the adult female
rat. The Journal of Comparative Neurology. 1996;373(1):108–17.
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8876466
Chapter 8: Get More of What You Want in Sex and
Relationships
Barth C, Villringer A, and Sacher J. Sex hormones affect neurotransmitters and
shape the adult female brain during hormonal transition periods. Frontiers in
Neuroscience. 2015;9:37. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2015.00037
Battaglia C, Nappi RE, Mancini F, et al. Menstrual cycle–related morphometric and
vascular modifications of the clitoris. The Journal of Sexual Medicine.
2008;5(12): 2853–61. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1743–6109.2008.00972.x
Bly R and Woodman M. The Maiden King: The Reunion of Masculine and
Feminine. New York: Holt, 1991.
Brilla LR and Conte V. Effects of a novel zinc-magnesium formulation on
hormones and strength. Journal of Exercise Physiology Online. 2000(3)4:26–
36.
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/288406212_Effects_of_a_novel_zinc-
magnesium_formulation_on_hormones_and_strength
Brody S. Slimness is associated with greater intercourse and lesser masturbation
frequency. Journal of Sex & Marital Therapy. 2004;30(4):251–61.
https://doi.org/10.1080/00926230490422368
Bullivant SB, Sellergren SA, Stern K, et al. Women’s sexual experience during the
menstrual cycle: Identification of the sexual phase by noninvasive measurement
of luteinizing hormone. The Journal of Sexual Research. 2004;41(1):82–93.
https://doi.org/10.1080/00224490409552216
Charnetski CJ and Brennan FX. Sexual frequency and salivary immunoglobulin A
(IgA). Psychological Reports. 2004;94(3 Pt 1):839–44.
https://doi.org/10.2466/pr0.94.3.839-844
Cutler WB, Garcia CR, and Kreiger A. Sexual behavior frequency and menstrual
cycle length in mature premenopausal women. Psychoneuroendocrinology.
1979;4(4):297–309. https://doi.org/10.1016/0306-4530(79)90014-3
Cutler WB, Preti G, Huggins GR, et al. Sexual behavior frequency and biphasic
ovulatory type menstrual cycles. Physiology & Behavior. 1985;34(5):805–10.
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/4041055
Ellison CR. Women’s Sexualities. Oakland, CA: New Harbinger Publications, 2000.
Excoffon L, Guillaume YC, Woronoff-Lemsi MC, et al. Magnesium effect on
testosterone–SHBG association studied by a novel molecular chromatography
approach. Journal of Pharmaceutical and Biomedical Analysis.
2009;49(2):175–80. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpba.2008.10.041
Fisher H. Why We Love: The Nature and Chemistry of Romantic Love. New York:
Henry Holt, 2004.
Frederick DA, St. John HK, Garcia JR, et al. Differences in orgasm frequency
among gay, lesbian, bisexual, and heterosexual men and women in a U.S.
national sample. Archives of Sexual Behavior. 2018;47(1):273–88.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10508-017-0939-z
Hambach A, Ever S, Summ O, et al. The impact of sexual activity on idiopathic
headaches: An observational study. Cephalalgia. 2013;33(6):384–89.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0333102413476374
Jung CG. The Basic Writings of C.G. Jung. New York: Random House, 1993.
Lê MG, Bachelot A, and Hill C. Characteristics of reproductive life and risk of
breast cancer in a case-control study of young nulliparous women. Journal of
Clinical Epidemiology. 1989;42(12):1227–33.
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/2585013
Legros JJ. Inhibitory effect of oxytocin on corticotrope function in humans: Are
vasopressin and oxytocin ying-yang neurohormones?
Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2001;26(7): 649–55.
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11500247
Leuner B, Glasper ER, and Gould E. Sexual experience promotes adult
neurogenesis in the hippocampus despite an initial elevation in stress hormones.
PLOS ONE. 2010;5(7): e11597. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0011597
Lorenz TK, Demas GE, and Heiman JR. Interaction of menstrual cycle phase and
sexual activity predicts mucosal and systemic humoral immunity in healthy
women. Physiology & Behavior. 2015;152(Pt A):92–98.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physbeh.2015.09.018
Lorenz TK, Heiman JR, and Demas GE. Sexual activity modulates shifts in
TH1/TH2 cytokine profile across the menstrual cycle: An observational study.
Fertility and Sterility. 2015;104(6)1513–21.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fertnstert.2015.09.001
Martins MA, Moss MB, Mendes IK, et al. Role of dietary fish oil on nitric oxide
synthase activity and oxidative status in mice red blood cells. Food & Function.
2014;5(12): 3208–15. https://doi.org/10.1039/c4fo00055b
Meston CM. Sympathetic nervous system activity and female sexual arousal. The
American Journal of Cardiology. 2000;86(2A):30F–34F.
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10899275
Murrell TG. The potential for oxytocin (OT) to prevent breast cancer: A hypothesis.
Breast Cancer Research and Treatment. 1995;35(2):225–29.
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/7647345
Om AS and Chung KW. Dietary zinc deficiency alters 5 alpha-reduction and
aromatization of testosterone and androgen and estrogen receptors in rat liver.
The Journal of Nutrition. 1996;126(4):842–48.
https://doi.org/10.1093/jn/126.4.842
Panzer C, Wise S, Fantini G, et al. Impact of oral contraceptives on sex hormone-
binding globulin and androgen levels: A retrospective study in women with
sexual dysfunction. The Journal of Sexual Medicine. 2006;3(1):104–13.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1743-6109.2005.00198.x
Paul KN, Turek FW, and Kryger MH. Influence of sex on sleep regulatory
mechanisms. Journal of Women’s Health. 2008;17(7):1201–8.
https://doi.org/10.1089/jwh.2008.0841
Twenge JM, Sherman RA, and Wells BE. Declines in sexual frequency among
American adults, 1989–2014. Archives of Sexual Behavior. 2017;46(8):2389–
401. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10508-017-0953-1
Verhaeghe J, Gheysen R, and Enzlin P. Pheromones and their effect on women’s
mood and sexuality. Facts, Views & Vision in ObGyn. 2013;5(3):189–95.
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3987372/
Wallwiener CW, Wallwiener L-M, Seeger H, et al. Prevalence of sexual dysfunction
and impact of contraception in female German medical students. The Journal of
Sexual Medicine. 2010;7(6):2139–48. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1743-
6109.2010.01742.x
Weeks D. Secrets of the Superyoung. New York: Penguin Group, 1998.
Chapter 9: Making Motherhood Easier
Apter D and Hermanson E. Update on female pubertal development. Current
Opinion in Obstetrics & Gynecology. 2002;14:475–81.
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12401974
Brown B. The Gifts of Imperfection: Let Go of Who You Think You’re Supposed to
Be and Embrace Who You Are. Center City, MN: Hazelden Publishing, 2010.
Buttke DE, Sircar K, and Martin C. Exposures to endocrine-disrupting chemicals
and age of menarche in adolescent girls in NHANES (2003–2008).
Environmental Health Perspectives. 2012;120(11):1613–18.
https://doi.org/10.1289/ehp.1104748
Campbell BC. Adrenarche and middle childhood. Human Nature. 2011;22:327.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12110-011-9120-x
Dass R. Be Here Now. San Cristobal, New Mexico: Lama Foundation, 1971.
Doss BD and Rhoades GK. The transition to parenthood: Impact on couples’
romantic relationships. Current Opinion in Psychology. 2017;13:25–28.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.copsyc.2016.04.003
Dunneram Y, Greenwood DC, Burley VJ, et al. Dietary intake and age at natural
menopause: Results from the UK Women’s Cohort Study. Journal of
Epidemiology & Community Health. 2018;72:733–40.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/jech-2017-209887
Friedan B. The Feminine Mystique (50th Anniversary Edition). New York: W.W.
Norton, 2013.
Galea LA, Wide JK, and Barr AM. Estradiol alleviates depressive-like symptoms in
a novel animal model of post-partum depression. Behavioural Brain Research.
2001; 122(1):1–9. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11287071
Garbes A. Like a Mother: A Feminist Journey Through Science and Culture of
Pregnancy. New York: Harper Wave, 2018.
Hewlett SA and Buck Luce C. “Off-Ramps and On-Ramps: Keeping Talented
Women on the Road to Success.” Harvard Business Review. Mar. 2005.
https://hbr.org/2005/03/off-ramps-and-on-ramps-keeping-talented-women-on-
the-road-to-success
Hickey M, Balen A. Menstrual disorders in adolescence: Investigation and
management. Human Reproduction Update. 2003;9:493–504.
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/14640381
Hoekzema E, Barba-Muller E, Pozzobon C, et al. Pregnancy leads to long-lasting
changes in human brain structure. Nature Neuroscience. 2017;20(2):287–300.
https://doi.org/10.1038/nn.4458
“How Do I Know If My Menstrual Cycle Is Normal?” Planned Parenthood.
Accessed Nov. 11, 2019. https://www.plannedparenthood.org/learn/health-and-
wellness/menstruation/how-do-i-know-if-my-menstrual-cycle-normal
Kim P, Strathearn L, and Swain JE. The maternal brain and its plasticity in humans.
Hormones and Behavior. 2016;77:113–23.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.yhbeh.2015.08.001
Koebele SV, et al. Hysterectomy uniquely impacts spatial memory in a rat model: A
role for the nonpregnant uterus in cognitive processes. Endocrinology.
2019;160(1):1–19. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30535329
Lawrence E, Cobb RJ, Rothman AD, et al. Marital satisfaction across the transition
to parenthood. Journal of Family Psychology: JFP: Journal of the Division of
Family Psychology of the American Psychological Association (Division 43).
2008;22(1):41–50. https://doi.org/10.1037/0893-3200.22.1.41
Liedloff, J. The Continuum Concept: In Search of Happiness Lost. Cambridge, MA:
Perseus Books, 1986.
Mayo Clinic staff. “Menstrual Cycle: What’s Normal, What’s Not.” Mayo Clinic.
June 13, 2019. https://www.mayoclinic.org/healthy-lifestyle/womens-health/in-
depth/menstrual-cycle/art-20047186
Nazarov I, Lee JW, Soupene E, et al. Multipotent stromal stem cells from human
placenta demonstrate high therapeutic potential. Stem Cells Translational
Medicine. 2012;1(5):359–72. https://doi.org/10.5966/sctm.2011-0021
Northrup C. “The Wisdom of Menopause.” DrNorthrop.com.
https://www.drnorthrup.com/wisdom-of-menopause/
Northrup C. Women’s Bodies, Women’s Wisdom. New York: Bantam Doubleday,
1997.
Chapter 10: Dynamic, Wise, and Free
Alexander E. Proof of Heaven: A Neurosurgeon’s Journey Into Life After Death.
New York: Simon & Schuster, 2012.
Chen Zeng T, Aw AJ, and Feldman MW. Cultural hitchhiking and competition
between patrilineal kin groups explain the post-Neolithic Y-chromosome
bottleneck. Nature Communications. 2018;9:2077.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-04375-6
D’Ambra Fagella L. “Women in Artificial Intelligence—A Visual Study of
Leadership Across Industries.” Sept.14, 2017.
https://www.techemergence.com/women-in-artificial-intelligence-visual-study-
leaderships-across-industries/
Datta A, Tschantz MC, and Datta A. Automated experiments on ad privacy
settings: A tale of opacity, choice, and discrimination. Proceedings on Privacy
Enhancing Technologies. 2015;(1):92–112.
https://www.andrew.cmu.edu/user/danupam/dtd-pets15.pdf
Eller C. The Myth of Matriarchal Prehistory: Why an Invented Past Won’t Give
Women a Future. Boston, MA: Beacon Press, 2001.
Gimbutas, M. The Civilization of the Goddess. New York: HarperCollins, 1991.
Graf N, Brown A, and Patten E. “The Narrowing, but Persistent, Gender Gap in
Pay.” Pew Research Center. Apr. 9, 2018. http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-
tank/2018/04/09/gender-pay-gap-facts/
Gray M. The Optimized Woman: Using Your Menstrual Cycle to Achieve Success
and Fulfillment. Hants, UK: O Books, 2009.
Johnson PA, Fitzgerald T, Salganicoff A, et al. Sex-Specific Medical Research: Why
Women’s Health Can’t Wait. A Report of the Mary Hogan Connors Center for
Women’s Health & Gender Biology at Brigham and Women’s Hospital. 2014.
https://www.brighamandwomens.org/assets/BWH/womens-
health/pdfs/ConnorsReportFINAL.pdf
Karmin M, Saag L, Vicente M, et al. A recent bottleneck of Y chromosome
diversity coincides with a global change in culture. Genome Research.
2015;25(4):459–66. https://doi.org/10.1101/gr.186684.114
Liu KA and Dipietro Mager NA. Women’s involvement in clinical trials: Historical
perspective and future implications. Pharmacy Practice. 2016;14(1):708.
https://doi.org/10.18549/PharmPract.2016.01.708
Lorde A. I Am Your Sister: Collected and Unpublished Writings of Audre Lorde.
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2009.
http://www.pages.drexel.edu/~jc3962/COR/Hierarchy.pdf
Myss C. Why People Don’t Heal and How They Can. New York: Three Rivers
Press, 1997.
Pinkola Estés C. Women Who Run With the Wolves: Myths and Stories of the Wild
Woman Archetype. New York: Ballantine Books, 1992.
Pope A and Wurlitzer SH. Wild Power: Discover the Magic of Your Menstrual
Cycle and Awaken the Feminine Path to Power. Carlsbad, CA: Hay House,
2017.
Rose S. The Path of the Priestess: A Guidebook for Awakening the Divine
Feminine. Rochester, VT: Inner Traditions, 2003.
“The Women’s Kingdom.” PBS Frontline. July 19, 2005.
http://www.pbs.org/frontlineworld/rough/2005/07/introduction_to.html
Index
The pagination of this digital edition does not match the print edition from which
the index was created. To locate a specific entry, please use your e-book reader’s
search tools.
Note: Page numbers in italics refer to figures and tables.
acne, 194–95
ACTH (adrenocorticotropic hormone), 64
adaptogens, 252
adrenal fatigue, 86, 136
adrenal glands
caffeine and, 114
in childhood, 287
exercise and, 136, 137
hormones produced in, 65, 84
supporting, 181, 197
adrenaline, 84
adrenarche, 287
adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), 64
adult menstrual years, 290
af Klint, Hilma, 312
aging, 295–96
AI (artificial intelligence), 325–26
allostatic load, 86
Amen, Daniel, 71
amygdala, 71, 266
Angier, Natalie, 321
anterior cingulate, 72
Anti-Bloatini, 194
antioxidants, 103, 195, 200–201
anxiety
brain function and, 72
cycle disconnection and, 164
foods and micronutrients for, 108, 251
postpartum, 274, 294
stress response and, 111, 158
appetite, 86, 109, 117, 209
arousal, 239–41, 242, 259, 262–63
artificial intelligence (AI), 325–26
Artist’s Way, The (Cameron), 174
Athena Doctrine, The (Gerzema, D’Antonio), 232–33
autoimmune disorders, 77–78, 209
basal body temperature, 264
beans, 190
Bennet, Robin Rose, 213
biohacking
approaches to, 27, 34, 94, 186–87
cycle syncing required for, 63, 94
defined, 34, 93
for immune system health, 78
during reproductive years, 46
at work, 236
Biohacking Tool Kit
addressing emotional factors, 201–4
adopting biohacking mindset, 186–87
choosing foods, 189–95
for hormonal birth control, 205–18
monitoring period blood, 182–86
nurturing adrenals, 181
removing endocrine disruptors, 187–89
replenishing micronutrients, 195–201, 251
in special circumstances, 203–4
stabilizing blood sugar, 181–82
supporting elimination, 181
biological systems, factors affecting. See also brain; immune system; metabolism;
microbiome; stress response
food, 106–11
sex, 265–69
stress, 157–60
synthetic birth control, 208–10
28-day cycle, 63
birth control, male, 210
birth control, nonhormonal, 212–13
birth control, synthetic (hormonal)
brain affected by, 206, 208
cycle affected by, 205–8, 214
cycle syncing while on, 57, 214
as endocrine disruptor, 205
function of, 21, 205–6
genetic testing and, 112
health issues masked by, 21–22, 207, 289
immune system affected by, 209
metabolism affected by, 209
microbiome affected by, 197, 209–10
over-prescription of, 4, 194, 205, 289, 303–4
periods affected by, 21, 206
quitting, 211, 215–16
risks vs. benefits of, 210
sex drive affected by, 262–63
stress response affected by, 210
bliss, domestic, 258–59
bloating, 193, 194
blood, menstrual, 23, 183, 184, 248
blood sugar levels
cortisol spikes and, 87, 111, 159
exercise and, 133–34
food cravings and, 98, 159
foods stabilizing, 104, 108, 109, 110, 120–21
insulin regulation of, 65, 87, 159, 182
micronutrients supporting, 103, 199
stabilizing before syncing, 181–82
symptoms associated with, 98, 159, 181–82
bodies, female
myths and mys-education about, 4, 15–23, 62, 307
uniqueness and wonder of, 23–24, 63, 311
body, listening to, 163–64
bowel movements, 104
brain
birth control and, 206, 208
circadian rhythms and, 43
foods supporting, 107–8
microbiome connected to, 81
mother-child cells, 291
motherhood-related changes to, 273–75
parts of, 71–72
PMS and, 74
sex and, 266
stress/stress response and, 85–86, 157–58
28-day cycle and, 70–76, 107–8, 224–26
in women vs. men, 71–73
breaking up, 246–47
breast cancer, 265
breastfeeding, 147–48, 274, 293–94
breast milk, 23–24
breasts, fibrocystic, 112–13
breast tenderness, 195
Breus, Michael, 41
Brizendine, Louann, 71
Brown, Brené, 275
burnout, 156
business cycles, 229–30
B vitamins, 197–98, 250–51
caffeine, 112–15, 192, 194, 195
calorie restriction diets, 122–23
Cameron, Julia, 174
Campbell, Joseph, 313
cancer, 76, 81–82, 265
cardiovascular disease, 265
cervical cap, 212
childhood, 287–88
chronobiology, 40
cigarette smoke, 288
circadian rhythm, 40–44. See also 24-hour clock
Circe (Miller), 321
Clennell, Bobby, 141
climax, 241
clitoris, 239–40
Conaboy, Chelsea, 273
condoms, 212
Continuum Concept, The (Liedloff), 286
contraceptives. See birth control
cooking methods, 115–16, 125, 128. See also food preparation
corpus callosum, 72
corpus luteum, 68, 69, 197, 225, 290
cortisol
bloating related to, 193
caffeine and, 114
exercise and, 133–34, 136
functions of, 65, 84
hormones interacting with, 87, 111, 158, 159
metabolism affected by, 159
obesity risk and, 159
period affected by, 65, 87, 182
production of, 65, 84, 111, 158
in women vs. men, 84
courtship, romantic, 257–58
cramps
exercise and, 141
food and, 128, 192–93
hormonal imbalance causing, 74
micronutrients and, 199
myths about, 20–21
vs. “normal” periods, 185
related symptoms, 74
sex and, 248, 264
stress and, 159
cravings, 97–98, 103, 159
creation cycle, 52
creative processes, managing. See also energy, feminine; time management
rest and, 174, 175
syncing plan, 166–67, 172–73
28-day cycle and, 165–66
creativity, 203, 278–79
culture
changes in, 35–36
male-centric bias of, 24–26, 41, 55
myths perpetuated by, 19, 62, 307
productivity emphasized by, 52–55, 156
sex cues from, 238
Cycle Syncing Method™. See also FLO protocol
addressing menstrual issues before syncing, 181–82
benefits for biological systems, 75, 78, 80, 83, 88
benefits for life, 33–34, 47–49, 58–59
biohacking with, 63, 94
creative process syncing plan, 166–67, 172–73 (See also creative
processes, managing)
cyclical hacks, 59
defined, 35
exercise syncing plan, 139–44, 141 (See also exercise)
flexible approach to, 125–26, 316–19
food syncing plan, 100–104, 105–6, 127–29 (See also food; recipes)
4-week plan for, 177–78
goal of, 126
hormone issues resolved in, 66
online community, 58
origins of, 30–32, 151–54
overcoming obstacles in, 49, 50–57, 316–18
for parenting, 284
in perimenopause, 297–98
philosophy of, 35, 95, 129
sex syncing plan, 241–50, 249 (See also orgasm; sex)
starting, 59, 127–29, 142–45, 177–78, 216
for transgender and nonbinary women, 7
while on pill, 57, 214
work syncing plan, 223–28, 227, 235 (See also work)
CYP1A2 gene, 114
cysts, breasts and ovarian, 113, 202–3
dairy, 98–99, 193, 195
D’Antonio, Michael, 232–33
Daou, Vanessa, 170
Dass, Ram, 286
Daughters of the Earth (Niethammer), 321
de Botton, Alain, 56
decision making, 163–64
Deloitte, 235
depression
birth control and, 207, 208
microbiome and, 252
micronutrients and, 199, 200, 251
postpartum, 294
DHEA, 241, 266, 287
Diamandis, Peter, 293
diaphragm, 212
diet. See food
diets, weight-loss, 20, 109, 116–17, 119–23, 124
Doing Harm (Dusenbery), 27
dopamine, release of, 103, 240, 257, 266, 274
Dusenbery, Maya, 27
eating disorders, 127, 288
education, women’s health, 4, 15–23, 62, 307
elimination organs, 104, 181, 182, 200
Eller, Cynthia, 322
Ellison, Carol Rinkleib, 264
emotions. See also mood
around cycle syncing, 49, 314–16
sex and, 259
symptoms related to, 74, 201–2
endocrine disruptors, 187–89, 205, 288
endocrine system, 64, 181–82
endometrial hyperplasia, 184
endometriosis, 113, 190–91, 203, 264–65
energy, feminine. See also creative processes, managing; work
caffeine unnecessary for, 115
characteristics of, 56–57, 154, 155
cultural change reflecting, 35–36
discovering, 151–54
leaks, 156–57
managing across cycle, 168–71
vs. masculine energy, 154
rest and, 154–55, 171
spiritual and scientific dimensions of, 152–53, 309–12
suppression of, 20, 152
time management and, 50–51, 57, 153, 160–63, 172–73
US women’s soccer team and, 142
energy, masculine, 152, 154, 155
Ensler, Eve, 321
entrepreneurship, 222
Estés, Clarissa Pinkola, 312
estrobolome, 82, 102, 193, 200
estrogen
birth control and, 205–6
brain affected by, 72–73, 107–8, 224
excess of (See estrogen dominance)
exercise and, 133–34, 136, 140, 144
food and, 100, 102, 103, 104, 108, 109, 115, 128–29
functions of, 64, 67, 68, 76, 77–78
hormones interacting with, 65, 67, 73, 85, 97, 108, 193
hot flashes and, 99
low levels of, 184
metabolization of, 103, 108, 111, 114, 193, 200
microbiome related to, 82
mood affected by, 107, 111
period blood as indicator of, 183, 184
period length affected by, 184
during postmenopause, 298
postpartum levels of, 293
during pregnancy, 291
production of, 64, 68
sex and, 242, 265
stress and, 86
weight and, 136, 159, 209
estrogen dominance
exercise and, 136, 144
food and, 103, 110, 114
liver function and, 114, 201
preventing, 78
symptoms and conditions related to, 83, 159, 160, 183, 190, 191, 194
weight and, 136, 159
exercise
birth control and, 209
estrogen dominance and, 136, 144
male-centric approaches to, 27, 132–33
periods and, 133, 138–39, 140–41, 145–46
postpartum, 146–48
syncing benefits, 139
syncing plan, 139–44, 141
24-hour cycle and, 132
28-day cycle and, 80, 133–38, 139–40
fat, dietary, 104
Female Brain, The (Brizendine), 71
Feminine Mystique, The (Friedan), 276
fertility
food and, 98–99, 113, 114, 123
hormones affecting, 65
micronutrients and, 199–200
sex and, 264
stress and, 86
tracking, 264
fertility awareness methods (FAMs), 213
fibroids, 113, 189–90
First Forty Days, The (Ou), 147
Fisher, Helen, 257
flaxseeds, 128–29, 190
FLO blockers, 50–57
FLO Living Hormone Center, 33
FLO Manifesto, 90
FLO protocol, 32, 62, 153, 181–82. See also Cycle Syncing Method™
flow state, 3, 162
follicles, 67, 68
follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), 64, 65, 67, 86, 198, 296, 298
follicular phase
in balanced state, 75
cooking methods for, 116, 128
exercise during, 133, 134, 139–40
foods for, 101, 102, 108, 128
immune system affected by, 77, 267
parenting during, 279–80
as Prepare stage of POWR, 67
recipes and meal plans for, 329, 330–32
relationship stages and, 261
sex during, 242–43, 250
in 28-day cycle, 44, 45, 69
work strategy during, 224
food. See also diets, weight-loss
anti-inflammatory, 191, 199
brain affected by, 107–8
caffeine, 112–15, 192, 194, 195
for children, 288
estrogen dominance and, 103, 110
fertility affected by, 98–99, 113, 114, 123
health conditions affected by, 20, 96–99, 128, 191–95
immune system affected by, 108–9
metabolism affected by, 103, 109
microbiome affected by, 110, 114, 194
mood affected by, 98, 103–4, 107, 108, 111
perimenopausal, 296
pheromones and, 252
postmenopausal, 299
postpartum, 294
pro-inflammatory, 199
sex and, 250–53
stress response affected by, 110–11
syncing plan, 100–104, 105–6, 127–29
28-day cycle and, 100–104
warming/cooling effects of, 104, 115, 116, 128, 294
weight loss and, 80
food preparation
cooked vs. raw, 103, 108, 109, 110, 115, 121–22, 191–92
cooking methods, 115–16, 125, 128
shopping, 105–6, 124
strategies for, 124–25
28-day cycle and, 115–16
Fourth Trimester, The (Johnson), 146
Friedan, Betty, 276
friendships, 300
FSH (follicle-stimulating hormone), 64, 65, 67, 86, 198, 296, 298
functional medicine, 35
Gates, Melinda, 53–54
gender. See also male bias
leadership traits and, 232–33
success and, 55
“time poverty” and, 53–54
genes, 111–12, 113–14
genetic testing, 111–12
Gerzema, John, 232–33
Gifts of Imperfection, The (Brown), 275
Gimbutas, Marija, 321
glutathione, 103
gluten-free diets, 120–21
golden years, 260–61
Google, 235
grain-free diets, 120–21
grains, whole, 190
Gray, Miranda, 321
Grigg-Spall, Holly, 112
gut bacteria. See microbiome; probiotics
gut health. See microbiome
happiness, 39, 171, 259
hCG (human chorionic gonadotropin), 290–91
headaches, 264
health care approaches
bio-individual, 89
equality in, 89
male-centric bias in, 26–29, 210, 309, 324
medical research and, 26–29, 323–25
prescription approach of, 303–4
heart, 291
hero’s journey, 313–14
hippocampus, 71, 73, 158, 266
hormonal cycle, female (28-day), 45
birth control and, 205–7, 214
brain affected by, 70–76, 107–8, 224–26
creative processes and, 165–66, 166–67, 172–73
cultural pressures at odds with, 47, 52–55
Day 1 of, 66
exercise and, 80, 133–37, 139–44, 141
food and, 100–104, 105–6, 127–29
health care and (See health care approaches)
hormone function in, 63–65 (See also hormonal imbalances)
immune system affected by, 76–78, 108–9
as infradian rhythm, 41, 44
inner dialogue and, 319–20, 320
length of, 87–88, 185, 263–64, 290, 299
life stages and, 285–87, 300–301
lunar cycle and, 41, 176–77, 299, 304
metabolism affected by, 78–80, 103, 109
microbiome affected by, 81–83, 110
modeling for daughters, 303–5
mothering style guided by, 277–84, 284
myths and mys-education about, 4, 15–23, 62, 307
out-of-sync state, 45–46, 77–78, 164
sex and, 241–50, 249
stress response affected by, 83–88, 110–11
success and, 152–53
syncing with (See Cycle Syncing Method™)
time management and, 47, 50–51, 154–55
24-hour cycle at odds with, 25–26, 40, 45–47
weight loss diets and, 20, 109, 116–17, 119–23, 124
weight loss/gain and, 80, 123
work and, 223–29, 227, 235
hormonal cycle, female, phases of. See also follicular phase; luteal phase; menstrual
phase; ovulatory phase
hormonal release across, 67–69, 69
out-of-sync state, 45–46, 77–78
POWR and, 66–69
relationship stages analogous to, 256–61
summarized, 44–45, 45, 67
transitions between, 126
US women’s soccer team and, 142
hormonal cycle, male (24-hour), 25
hormonal imbalances. See also specific conditions and symptoms
caffeine and, 112–15, 192, 194, 195
diets contributing to, 116–17, 118–19, 120–22, 123
endocrine disruptors, 187–89, 205, 288
exercise and, 133, 136, 140, 141, 142–43
microbiome affected by, 110, 159–60, 194, 200, 209–10, 268
micronutrients and, 251
resolving, 57, 66, 75, 117 (See also Biohacking Tool Kit; Cycle Syncing
Method™)
sex/relationships and, 246, 263–65
stress and, 52–53
traditional medical approaches to, 180, 181
hormonal life transitions, 287–89
hormones, 64–65, 69. See also specific hormones
hot flashes, 99
HPA (hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal) axis, 65, 84–85, 86
hPL (human placental lactogen), 292
HPO (hypothalamic-pituitary-ovarian) axis, 207, 289
human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG), 290–91
hungry ghost, 56
hypothalamus, 64, 67, 68, 72, 84, 206
hysterectomy, 298–99
immune system
birth control and, 208–9
foods supporting, 108–9
during pregnancy, 291
sex and, 267
stress and, 158–59
28-day cycle and, 76–78, 108–9
inflammation, 159, 191, 195, 198, 199. See also bloating; breast tenderness
infradian rhythms, 41, 45
inner voice, 319–20, 320
insula, 71
insulin, 65, 87, 111, 159, 182, 198, 199
intermittent fasting (IF), 119–20
intrauterine ball (IUBTM), 213
intrauterine device (IUD), copper, 212–13
Johnson, Kimberly Ann, 146
Johnson & Johnson, 235
Joy of Sex (Comfort), 321
Jung, C. G., 256, 259
Kessler, Meredith, 135, 145
ketogenic diet, 118–19
Koven, Susan, 54
leadership, 232–33
leaky gut, 82
libido
birth control and, 262–63
cycle phases and, 242, 243, 246, 248
foods and supplements for, 250–52
mood and, 252
relationship stages and, 257, 258, 259–60
stress and, 86
Liedloff, Jean, 286
life stages, 285–87, 300–301. See also motherhood
life transitions, hormonal
adult menstrual years, 290
childhood, 287–88
perimenopause, 295–98
postmenopause, 298–300
postpartum, 293–95
pregnancy, 290–93
puberty, 288–89
liver function, 200–201
Lorde, Audre, 323
lunar rhythms, 41, 176–77, 299, 304
luteal phase
in balanced state, 75
breakups during, 247
cooking methods for, 116, 128
exercise during, 133–34, 136, 140
foods for, 101, 103–4, 107, 108, 128
immune system affected by, 267
parenting during, 281–82
perimenopause analogous to, 260
pheromones and, 252
recipes and meal plans for, 329, 336–38
relationship stages and, 260
resting during, 155
sex during, 245–46, 250
in 28-day cycle, 44, 45, 69
as Work stage of POWR, 68
work strategy during, 225
luteinizing hormone (LH), 64, 65, 68, 86, 198
lymphatic massage, 267
macrobiotic diet, 122
magnesium, 191, 192, 193, 198, 251
Maiden King, The (Woodman), 256
male bias
about success, 152
in biohacking, 27, 94
in culture, 24–25, 41, 55
in exercise approaches, 27, 132–33
in medical profession, 26, 27–29, 210, 309, 324
male hormonal cycle, 25
Mandelbrot, Benoit, 311
masturbation, 249–50, 268
matrescence, 273, 285
matriarchal societies, 321–23
meal plans, 329
memory, 299
menarche, 97, 288. See also menstrual phase; periods, menstrual
menopause, 99, 111
menstrual phase
in balanced state, 75
cooking methods for, 116, 128
exercise during, 138–39, 140–41, 145–46
foods for, 101, 104–5, 128
parenting during, 283–84
recipes and meal plans for, 329, 339–41
resting during, 154–55
as Rest stage of POWR, 69
sex during, 247–48, 250, 264, 265
in 28-day cycle, 44, 45, 69
work strategy during, 225–26
menstruation. See period, menstrual
metabolism
birth control and, 209
foods supporting, 103, 109
during pregnancy, 292
sex and, 267–68
stress and, 159
28-day cycle and, 78–80, 103, 109
microbiome
birth control and, 187, 209–10
bloating related to, 193
brain connected to, 81
cancer and, 81–82
disruptors, 200
foods and, 110, 114, 194
imbalance in, 110, 159–60, 194, 200, 209–10, 268
infant, 24
mood related to, 252
probiotics and, 102, 200, 251–52
sex and, 268
stress and, 159–60
28-day cycle and, 81–83, 110
in women’s vs. men’s bodies, 81
micromanagement, 318
micronutrients. See also specific micronutrients
for blood sugar stabilization, 103, 199
for cramps, 192–93
deficiency, 114, 195–96
dieting and, 123
hormonal health related to, 196–97
microbiome and, 110
replenishing, 196–201
sex and, 250–52
stress response and, 110–11
midlife transition, 259–60
Miller, Madeline, 321
miscarriage, 114, 279, 291
mood. See also emotions
estrogen and, 107, 111
food and, 98, 103–4, 107, 108, 111
gut health and, 252
during pregnancy, 291
sex and, 259
Mosuo culture, 322–23
motherhood
brain changes related to, 273–75
creative cycle and, 278–79
cultural pressures around, 271–72, 275–76
as life stage, 285–87, 300–301
modeling cycle-syncing for daughters, 303–5
perfectionism in, 275–77, 286
perpetual productivity mode in, 275, 276
28-day cycle and, 277–84, 284
working and, 275–76, 301–2
Mothering and Daughtering (Reynolds), 304
Myth of Matriarchal Prehistory, The (Eller), 322
myths and mys-education
about periods, 19–23, 138
about PMS, 3, 20–21
about productivity, 162, 309
about time management, 151
about women’s bodies, 4, 15–23, 62, 307
Niethammer, Carolyn, 321
nitric oxide, 240, 241, 243, 248, 251
norepinephrine, 257
Northrup, Christiane, 152, 202, 299, 321
nuts, 192
obesity, 159
omega-3 fatty acids, 199, 251
orgasm. See also sex
brain affected by, 266
climax, 241
foods/micronutrients and, 250–53
hormone balance affected by, 263–65
immune system affected by, 267
longevity linked to, 266
metabolism affected by, 267–68
microbiome affected by, 268
plateau, 240
self-pleasure, 249–50, 268
stress response affected by, 268–69
Ou, Heng, 147
ovaries, 64, 65
Overwhelmed (Schulte), 53
ovulation, 22, 87, 88, 98, 102, 114
ovulatory phase
in balanced state, 75
cooking methods for, 116, 128
exercise during, 140
foods for, 101, 102–3, 104, 108, 128
moods during, 107, 111
as Open Up stage of POWR, 68
parenting during, 280–81
recipes and meal plans for, 329, 333–35
relationship stages and, 257
sex during, 243–45, 250, 262
in 28-day cycle, 44, 45, 69
work strategy during, 224–25
oxytocin, release of
arousal and, 239, 259
during breastfeeding, 274, 293
hormones interacting with, 85
during labor, 292
relational bonding and, 258
during sex, 240, 241, 243, 248, 266
in stress response, 85
pancreas, 65
pantothenic acid, 197
parathyroid hormone (PTH), 64
parenting. See motherhood
Path of the Priestess, The (Rose), 321
PCOS (polycystic ovary syndrome)
author’s experience with, 30–32, 192
defined, 191
foods and, 113, 191–92
health risks associated with, 191
luteinizing hormone levels and, 65
micronutrients and, 200
perfectionism, 275–77, 286, 316–17, 318
perimenopause, 99, 184, 259, 295–98
periods, menstrual. See also menstrual phase
age of menarche, 97, 288
birth control and, 21, 206
blood properties, 23, 183–85, 248
cramps during (See cramps)
difficult symptoms, 23, 70
duration of, 87
exercise and, 133, 138–41, 145–46
genes related to, 111
heavy, 159
hormone levels and, 64–65, 87, 181–82
immune system and, 77
as indicator of hormonal health, 22, 69–70, 182–84
irregular, 86–88, 123, 133, 184
length of cycle, 87–88, 185, 263–64, 290, 299
length of period, 184–85, 263–64
missed, 21, 22, 88, 133, 184, 185
monitoring, 22
myths about, 19–23, 138
openness about, 145–46
during perimenopause, 296–97
postpartum, 293–94
proactive approaches to, 23
role in overall health, 22
sex and, 247–48, 250, 263–64, 265
stress and, 86–88
tracking, 289
perpetual productivity mindset, 73, 132, 174–75, 202, 230, 275, 276
pesticides, 189
PFC (prefrontal cortex), 71, 266
phases, hormonal. See hormonal cycle, female, phases of; specific phases
pheromones, 252
phytoestrogens, 99
“the pill.” See birth control, synthetic
pituitary gland, 64, 65, 67, 68, 84, 287
placenta, 292–93
PMS. See premenstrual syndrome; specific symptoms
Pope, Alexandra, 321
post-birth control syndrome, 215
postmenopause, 298–300
postpartum stage, 146–48, 274, 293–94
Power of Myth, The (Campbell), 313
Power of When, The (Breus), 41–42
POWR (Prepare, Open Up, Work, Rest), 66–69
prefrontal cortex (PFC), 71, 266
pregnancy, 183–84, 200, 290–93
premenstrual syndrome (PMS). See also specific symptoms
causes of, 20, 68, 74, 97–98, 113, 159
evaluating before syncing, 186
exercise and, 134
food and, 20, 97–98, 113, 128–29
myths about, 3, 20–21
risks of untreated, 74–75
sex and, 264
Pritchard, Mary, 209
probiotics, 102, 200, 251–52
procrastination, 317
productivity, healthy. See creative processes, managing; energy, feminine; time
management
productivity, nonstop. See also stress
benefits of abandoning, 174
cultural pressures for, 52–55, 156
environmental consequences of, 174–75
health consequences of, 156, 157, 175, 220–21
motherhood and, 301
myths about, 162, 309
progesterone
appetite and, 109
exercise and, 140
foods and, 100, 103, 104, 129
functions of, 64–65
hormones interacting with, 65, 87, 158, 193
period blood as indicator of, 183–84
during postmenopause, 298
pregnancy and, 183–84, 291
production of, 64–65, 68, 86, 100, 103, 104, 129
sleepiness associated with, 291
synthetic, 205–6, 208–9
progestin, 206, 208
project cycles, 229–30
prolactin, 86, 293
prostaglandins, 21, 104, 192, 193
PTH (parathyroid hormone), 64
puberty, 288–89
Queen Anne’s Lace, 213
Raisman, Aly, 145
raw diet, 121–22
recipes
Avocado Tater-Toast, 336
Bento Salmon Soba Miso Lunch, 339–40
Bunless Bison Burgers with the Works, 341
Chicken Veggie Buddha Bowl, 331–32
Chickpea Pasta with Garlic Kale, 338
Hearty Greens Salad with Salmon Toasts, 333–34
Lentil Tomato Quinoa Pilaf, 331
Overnight Oats with Cashews, Goji Berries, and Cinnamon, 330
PBJ Bowl, 339
Super Sex-Drive Salad, 253
Sweet Green Protein Smoothie, 333
Turkey Tacos, 337
Zoodles with Pumpkin Seed Pesto, 335
recipes, by phase
follicular, 330–32
luteal, 336–38
menstrual, 339–41
ovulatory, 333–35
refractory period, 241
relationships. See also friendships
breaking up, 246–47
courtship, 257–58
educating partner about cycle, 253–56
hormone imbalance and, 246
motherhood and, 300–301
stages of, 257–61
resting, 154–55, 171, 174, 175
Reynolds, Sil and Eliza, 304
right-timing, 50
Roar (Sims), 134–35
Robbins, Tony, 162, 292–93
Romm, Aviva, 86
Rose, Sharron, 321
Sacks, Alexandra, 273
Schulte, Bridget, 53
SCN (suprachiasmatic nucleus), 43
second clock. See hormonal cycle, female (28-day)
Secrets of the Superyoung (Weeks), 265
seed cycling, 128–29
selective estrogen receptor modulators (SERMs), 190
self-pleasure, 249–50, 268
serotonin
foods affecting, 103, 107
hormones interacting with, 73, 97, 108
microbiome and, 81
PMS and, 74
during sex, 241, 266
sex. See also libido
afterglow, 259
appearance and, 265
arousal, 239–41, 242, 259, 262–63
brain and, 266
cancer risk and, 265
cultural messages about, 238
cycle length and, 263–64
dryness and lubrication, 242, 244, 245, 248
factors hindering, 261
fertility and, 264
foods/micronutrients and, 250–53
immune system and, 267
language of, 238
longevity linked to, 266
metabolism and, 267–68
microbiome and, 268
orgasm, 240, 241, 265–69
partner communication, 253–56
relationship stages and, 257–61
self-pleasure, 249–50, 268
stress response and, 268–69
syncing plan, 241–50, 249
trends in, 237
28-day cycle and, 241–50
sex drive. See libido
sex hormone-binding globulin (SHBG), 262
shopping, grocery, 105–6, 124
Sims, Stacy, 134–35
soccer team, US women’s, 142
socioeconomic status, 288
soy, 190
sponge, 213
Status Anxiety (de Botton), 56
stem cell therapies, 292
stress. See also productivity, nonstop
bloating related to, 193
brain affected by, 85–86, 157–58
cultural expectations and, 47
hormone levels and, 65, 86, 87, 88, 111, 158
immune system affected by, 158–59
managing, 88
metabolism affected by, 159
microbiome affected by, 159–60
micronutrient absorption affected by, 195, 196, 198
stress response affected by, 160
symptoms associated with, 83, 85–86, 88, 157–60
stress hormones. See adrenaline; cortisol
stress response
birth control and, 210
foods supporting, 110–11
micronutrients supporting, 197, 198
productivity-related stress and, 160
sex and, 268
28-day cycle and, 83–88, 110–11
in women vs. men, 83, 84–85, 86
stretching, 145
success, perceptions about
feminine energy and, 152–53, 171, 174, 230–31
male-centric assumptions, 55–56, 152
supplements, 196–97. See also micronutrients; probiotics
Sweetening the Pill (Grigg-Spall), 112
teams, working with, 228–29, 233, 235
temperature, 264
testosterone
during courtship, 257
exercise and, 133–34, 140
functions of, 65, 76
hormones interacting with, 85
libido and, 262
micronutrients and, 251
during postmenopause, 298
production of, 65, 68
24-hour clock corresponding to, 25, 221
“There Is No Hierarchy of Oppressions” (Lorde), 323
thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), 64, 198, 287, 292
time management. See also creative processes, managing; energy, feminine; work
energy management and, 50–51, 153, 160–63, 172–73
myths about, 151
28-day cycle and, 47, 50–51, 154–55
“time poverty,” 53–54
TSH (thyroid-stimulating hormone), 64, 198, 287, 292
tumescence, 239–40
24-hour clock, 25–26, 40–44, 42, 132, 299
28-day cycle. See hormonal cycle, female (28-day)
ultradian rhythms, 41
Unleash the Power of the Female Brain (Amen), 71
uterine lining, 64, 67, 68, 183, 184, 203, 206
vaginal secretions, 24
Vagina Monologues, The (Ensler), 321
vegan diet, 121–22
vegetables, 127–28, 191–92, 194
vitamin D3, 199, 200
vitamin E, 129, 192, 195
Watson, Heather, 145
Weeks, David, 265
weight-loss diets, 20, 109, 116–17, 119–23, 124
weight loss/gain
birth control and, 209
estrogen dominance and, 136, 159
postpartum, 146–48
28-day cycle and, 80, 123
WHO (World Health Organization), 156
Why We Love (Fisher), 257
wild carrot seed, 213
Woman: An Intimate Geography (Angier), 321
WomanCode (Vitti), 30, 32
women, devaluing of, 16, 18, 20, 26–29, 41
women, power and influence of, 232–34, 320–21
Women’s Bodies, Women’s Wisdom (Northrup), 152, 202, 321
Women’s Kingdom, The (2012), 322
Women’s Sexualities (Ellison), 264
Women’s Voices for the Earth, 188
Women’s Yoga Book, The (Clennell), 141
Women Who Run With the Wolves (Estés), 312
Woodman, Marion, 256, 296, 312
Woolley, Catherine, 72
work. See also creative processes, managing; energy, feminine; time management
business and project cycles, 229–30
cultural conditioning about, 223 (See also productivity, nonstop)
leadership roles, 232–33
leave policies, 235
male vs. female statistics, 222
mixed-gender teams, 233
motherhood and, 275–76, 301–2
nontraditional approaches to, 222–23
success perceptions and, 171, 174, 230–31
syncing benefits, 234–36
syncing plan, 223–28, 227, 235
24-hour clock for, 219, 221
28-day cycle and, 224–29
World Health Organization (WHO), 156
Wurlitzer, Sjanie Hugo, 321
Zenger Folkman, 232
zinc, 194–95, 251
About the Author
ALISA VITTI, HHC, AADP, is a functional nutrition and
women’s hormone expert, the founder of modern hormone
health care company FLO Living, bestselling author of
WomanCode, and creator of MyFLO, the #1 paid period app
on iTunes and the first and only period tracking and cycle
syncing app. Vitti holds degrees from Johns Hopkins
University and the Institute for Integrative Nutrition.
Discover great authors, exclusive offers, and more at hc.com.
Advance Praise for In the FLO
“When I first heard Alisa explain the Cycle Syncing Method, I
was floored. As someone who has struggled with hormones, I
couldn’t believe what we don’t know about our bodies. I didn’t
realize how my everyday routine was affecting my mood, my
weight, and my energy. Working with Alisa has shown me
how to take care of my biological rhythms so I stay in a peak
flow state. It’s given me back my energy, made me a happier
mom, and made me passionate about sharing this information
with other women—it’s about time for us to get In the FLO.”
—Gabrielle Union-Wade, actor, activist,
and New York Times bestselling author of
We’re Going to Need More Wine
“Living in alignment with our cycle is the next frontier for
women’s health. Alisa’s book provides a tool for reconnecting
with your unique female biorhythms—a powerful offering
toward helping women reclaim hormone health and much-
needed life balance.”
—Aviva Romm, MD, author of The Adrenal
Thyroid Revolution
“This book teaches you how to use your biology to tune in to
your inner guidance and to create optimal flow in every area of
your life. It offers a path toward your highest power and
potential.”
—Gabrielle Bernstein, #1 New York Times
bestselling author of The Universe Has Your
Back
“In the FLO is Whole30 meets Bulletproof meets 4-Hour
Workweek—but designed exclusively for a woman’s body.
This book will change the way you eat, work out, manage your
time, and do your work—all in harmony with your body! It’s
the next wave in women’s health and, best of all, there aren’t
any complicated rules to follow—it’s liberating and logical.
Alisa will help you achieve your optimal health and live your
best life.”
—JJ Virgin, nutrition expert and New York
Times bestselling author of The Virgin Diet
“Alisa is a true pioneer in biohacking for women, and the
Cycle Syncing Method is an effective way for women to align
with their biological rhythms to optimize not only their health
but every other aspect of their lives from career to
relationships to motherhood. Every woman should read this
book!”
—Mark Hyman, MD, New York Times
bestselling author of The Blood Sugar
Solution
“Trying to operate on a 24-hour clock can leave moms
exhausted. Alisa’s revolutionary cyclical time management
method will liberate you from the stress and exhaustion of
trying to ‘do it all’ and instead adopt a more sustainable
approach. Finally you’ll replace guilt over all the things you
aren’t doing with guidance on the best ways to bond with your
child and care for yourself week by week.”
—Shefali Tsabary, PhD, psychologist,
educator, speaker, and New York Times
bestselling author of The Conscious Parent
“In this must-read hormonal guidebook, Alisa Vitti takes
readers on a fascinating voyage inside the female body and
brain to demystify the science of hormones. And she lays out a
one-of-a-kind nutrition and lifestyle plan to balance hormones
so you can think smarter, feel better, and stress less. Your body
and brain will thank you for it.”
—Daniel Amen, MD, psychiatrist,
neuroscientist, and New York Times
bestselling author of Unleash the Power of
the Female Brain
“Alisa walks you through the miraculous wonder that is your
female body and how to connect your health, career, and even
sex and relationships with your cycle to achieve amazing
results with less effort—better orgasms included.”
—Regena Thomashauer, New York Times
bestselling author of Pussy: A Reclamation
Also by Alisa Vitti
WomanCode

Copyright
This book contains advice and information relating to health care. It should be used
to supplement rather than replace the advice of your doctor or another trained
health professional. If you know or suspect you have a health problem, it is
recommended that you seek your physician’s advice before embarking on any
medical program or treatment. All efforts have been made to ensure the accuracy of
the information contained in this book as of the date of publication. This publisher
and the author disclaim liability for any medical outcomes that may occur as a
result of applying the methods suggested in this book.
IN THE FLO. Copyright © 2020 by Alisa Vitti. All rights reserved under
International and Pan-American Copyright Conventions. By payment of the
required fees, you have been granted the nonexclusive, nontransferable right to
access and read the text of this e-book on-screen. No part of this text may be
reproduced, transmitted, downloaded, decompiled, reverse-engineered, or stored in
or introduced into any information storage and retrieval system, in any form or by
any means, whether electronic or mechanical, now known or hereafter invented,
without the express written permission of HarperCollins e-books.
FIRST EDITION
Cover design: © HarperCollins
Cover art: rolandtopor and Liubou Yasiukovich | Shutterstock
Digital Edition JANUARY 2020 ISBN: 978-0-06-287055-1
Version 12072019
Print ISBN: 978-0-06-287048-3
About the Publisher
Australia
HarperCollins Publishers Australia Pty. Ltd.
Level 13, 201 Elizabeth Street
Sydney, NSW 2000, Australia
www.harpercollins.com.au
Canada
HarperCollins Publishers Ltd
Bay Adelaide Centre, East Tower
22 Adelaide Street West, 41st Floor
Toronto, Ontario, M5H 4E3
www.harpercollins.ca
India
HarperCollins India
A 75, Sector 57
Noida
Uttar Pradesh 201 301
www.harpercollins.co.in
New Zealand
HarperCollins Publishers New Zealand
Unit D1, 63 Apollo Drive
Rosedale 0632
Auckland, New Zealand
www.harpercollins.co.nz
United Kingdom
HarperCollins Publishers Ltd.
1 London Bridge Street
London SE1 9GF, UK
www.harpercollins.co.uk
United States
HarperCollins Publishers Inc.
195 Broadway
New York, NY 10007
www.harpercollins.com
* Heck, who am I kidding? Just check every box.
* If you’re in the early stages of syncing your cycle and trying to heal hormonal
imbalances, it is critical to keep your workouts to no more than thirty minutes. This
time limitation will prevent excess cortisol production and adrenal fatigue, and will
gradually lead you to an energizing cycle. And always check with your physician
before starting any exercise program.
